TNAU Agritech Portal :: Crop Protection
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Farmers' Innovation
|
Publications
|
Contact
Crop Protection
:: Quarantine :: Strengthening & Modernization of Plant quarantine Facilities in India
STRENGTHENING & MODERNISATION OF PLANT QUARNATINE FACILITIES IN INDIA
Plant Quarantine regulatory measures are operative through the ‘Destructive Insects & Pests Act, 1914 (Act 2 of 1914) in the country. The purpose and intent of this Act is to prevent the introduction of any insect, fungus or other pest, which is or may be destructive to crops. The import of agricultural commodities is presently regulated through the Plant Quarantine (Regulation of Import into India) Order, 2003 the provisions of New Policy on Seed Development, 1988. Further, the significance of Plant Quarantine has increased in view of Globalization and liberalization in International trade of plants and plant material in the wake of Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Agreement under WTO. The phytosanitary certification of agricultural commodities being exported is also undertaken as per International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), 1951.
In line with the New Policy on Seed Development, 1988 and the provisions of PQ Order, 2003, the specified planting material for propagation (viz., cuttings, saplings, bud woods, etc.) require growing under Post Entry Quarantine (PEQ) for a specified period. The import permit for such planting material is granted based on a certificate from Designated Inspection Authorities of the concerned jurisdiction stating that the importer possesses the post entry quarantine facility for the imported planting material. Such consignments are released with the intimation to the concerned Inspection Authorities for conducting further PEQ inspections and the final clearance is granted based on the PEQ Inspection Report. The pest risk analysis is mandatory for all the plants/plant material prior to its import into India as per PQ Order, 2003. The risk of exotic pests and diseases is minimized by identifying the potential pests which can get into the country with the specified commodity and seeking export certification for their freedom/pest free area status, etc. from the exporting country. Inspection of agricultural commodities meant for export as per the requirements of importing countries under International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) 1951 of FAO which’s now replaced by revised text of IPPC as per the model certificates prescribed under IPPC and issue Phytosanitary Certificate. The export inspections are carried out to facilitate certification of exportable plants and plant material as per the requirement of importing country in line with the above Convention. The export inspections involves sampling and detailed laboratory tests in case of seeds and planting material for propagation whereas visual examination with hand lens and washing tests, etc are carried out for plant material meant for consumption. The export inspections are conducted at exporters’ premises also to facilitate exports for agricultural commodities meant for consumption.
As per Plant Quarantine (Regulation of Import into India) Order, 2003 a total of 60 entry points including 34 seaports, 12 airports and 14 land custom stations are notified points of entry for import of plants and plant material. Besides, 60 Inland Container Depot/Container Freight Station, 11 Foreign Post Offices have also been notified for the entry of plants/plant material under the PQ Order, 2003.
Objectives
:
Inspection of imported agricultural commodities for preventing the introduction of exotic pests and diseases inimical to Indian fauna and flora through implementation of DIP Act,1914 and the Plant Quarantine (Regulation of Import into India) Order, 2003 issued there under.
Inspection of plants and plant material meant for export as per the requirements under International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) 1951 of FAO to facilitate pest free trade.
Detection of exotic pests and diseases for their containment by adopting domestic quarantine regulations, if introduced.
The ongoing activities assigned under the scheme include:
To issue import permits with additional declarations and special conditions to facilitate
safe imports of agricultural products.
To undertake quarantine inspection and laboratory testing of plants and plant material to ensure freedom from exotic pests.
To undertake phytosanitary certification (for issuance of Phytosanitary Certificates (PSCs); 150 Nos. of Officers from Central/ State/ UT Governments have been authorized for this purpose.
To undertake fumigation/disinfestations/disinfections of commodities to control infestation/infection.
To undertake certification of post-entry quarantine facilities and inspection of imported growing plants and plant material; 41 Nos. of Inspection Authorities have been designated.
To support Export market access for India’s Agriculture products from the phytosanitary point of view.
To facilitate safe global trade in agriculture by assisting the producers and exporters by providing a technically competent and reliable phytosanitary certificate system to meet the requirements of trading partners.
To provide Grants-in-aid to Designated Inspection Authorities to meet the travel expenses and also to State PSC issuing authorities for equipping them with minimal equipments required for export inspection/certification.
.
Granting approval/accreditation of Treatment providers in line with the requirement of ISPM-15.
To undertake PRAs of different agricultural commodities with respect to their import or export in relation to the countries concerned.
Present Setup
:
Presently, there are 35 Plant quarantine Stations at different International Airports, Seaports and Land frontiers implementing the Plant Quarantine regulations with its headquarters at Faridabad. The list of existing Plant Quarantine Stations is at Annexure-I.
Annexure-I
:
List of Existing Plant Quarantine Stations (35) and their categorization based on the current PQ activities.
Category I Stations
1. Agartala
2. Guwahati
3. Raxaul
4. Sanauli
5. Banbasa
6. Rupaidiha
7. Jogbani
8. Attari-Wagah Border - Rly. Stn. (working unit under RPQS Amritsar)
9. Amritsar Rly. Stn (working unit under RPQS, Amritsar)
10. ICD Tughlakabad (working unit under NPQS, Delhi)
11. Air Cargo, Delhi Airport (working unit under NPQS, Delhi)
12. Calicut Airport
Category II Stations
13. Panitanki
14. Kalimpong
15. Trivandrum
16. Tiruchirapalli
17. Bhavnagar
18. Hyderabad
19. Attari-Wagah Border - LCS (working unit under RPQS, Amritsar)
20. Air Cargo, Mumbai (working unit under RPQS, Mumbai)
21. Air Cargo, Kolkata (working unit under RPQS, Kolkata)
Category III Stations
22. Kandla
23. Visakhapatnam
24. Tuticorin
25. Cochin
26. Kakinada
27. Nava Sheva
28. Mangalore
29. Bongaon
Category IV Stations
30. New Delhi
31. Amritsar
32. Chennai
33. Kolkata
34. Mumbai
35. Bangalor
Station made functional by deputing staff from other places.
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Publications
|
Contact Us
© TNAU 2008-2024 All Rights Reserved.