Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Hanging Containers
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Hanging Containers
HANGING CONTAINERS
A group of attractive indoor plants in a hanging basket will
indeed provide a beautiful display, but do not rush into hanging a container
from a hook in the ceiling or a bracket on the wall until you have carefully
studied the difficulties.
They are particularly useful where space is limited, but
even in conventional gardens they are many opportunities to use aerial displays
of plants. They are invaluable for softening architectural environments;
helping to lift the eye above other planting; and can be integrated into
ambitious schemes in which plants are arranged on several lines.
Hanging baskets:
The traditional hanging basket is a simple suspended
container consisting of a wire frame in which a linear holds sufficient growing
mix to sustain one or, more usually, several plants. A number of other
suspended containers – either ready-made or improvised – serve the same purpose
and displayed in a similar way to hanging baskets.
Wire-framed baskets and other suspended containers are best
planted so that the container itself is concealed by full and trailing growth.
This may be achieved with a single vigorous trailer,such as
Tradescantia zebrina,
a popularhouse or conservatory
plant that can
also be moved outdoors in summer.In general,
however, it is easier to create a floating cloud of foliage and flowers with a
mixture of several different, less tender plants. The aim is to achieve a loosely rounded shape, using plants
of different habit, so that growth hides the container. One approach is to use
upright and rounded plants to form a crown above an irregular, hanging fringe
of trailing or spreading plants. This could be achieved by including erect
cultivars of pelargoniums and
Verbena
x
hybrida
, franked by trailing
fuchsias, lobelias, and petunias. Another option is to use containers that are
in themselves ornamental, so that, even when the display is at its peak, some
of the container is visible.
Hanging
baskets are often hung as isolated features, perhaps to take advantage of an existing
support. This might be an arc or the cross piece of a pergola, for example.
Another approach is to fit specially made supporters for single or multiple
hanging baskets.
Brackets can be simple and inconspicuous, or ornamental and in
a style that suits the surroundings.
A hanging basket can make a dramatic focal point to enliven
a blank wall, especially if it can be seen from a window or door. They can also
be eye-catching when suspended from the corner of a building, but for safety
they must be well above the highest of passers-by.
Elevated eve-catcher
:
This vibrant
combination of trailing plants ensures a long season of colour; they mask the
basket, but the ornamental bracket can still be seen.
The most
obvious of the multiple arrangements are pairs of baskets, mounted, for
example, either side of a door or combined with other containers. A handsome
design can be created by using a large container, such as an urn, at ground
level against a wall, with hanging baskets mounted above it and on either side.
The plants in the hanging baskets may match or contrast with those in the large
container.
For a more ambitious scheme, hanging baskets can be hung in rows,
for example, on a series of arches, or on brackets along a wall. Carefully
coordinated or contrasting plantings can be dramatically staged by using a cast
of smaller baskets either side of a large one, or by introducing variations in
the height at which the containers are suspended.Using the cross-pieces of a
pergola, a sequence of paired hanging baskets either side of a path makes an
impressive avenue, although it is worth bearing in mind that such features will
be time-consuming to water.
Containers & Medium:
You must choose a container, which is suitable for indoors.
The standard wire basket lined with sphagnum moss is ideal for outdoors, but in
the home you will have the problem of water dripping on to the floor. You can
line the basket with polythene sheet, but waterlogging may then be a problem.
The best answer is to put the pots of plants in a larger waterproof container,
which bears the holding wires, chains or cords. The space between the pots and
the hanging container should be filled with moist peat. A variation is a
plastic hanging pot with a built-in drip tray. Always use a peat-based potting
compost rather than a soil one—excess weight can be a problem.
Watering
:
To make watering and misting an easier task place the display
at eye level or if you must suspend it over head-high then have a pulley
arrangement instead of an ordinary hook. You can buy a pump-action watering can
if the display cannot be lowered. Ensure that the hook is securely fixed to a
ceiling joist or the bracket is firmly attached to the wall, and finally make
sure that your choice of plants is suited to the light available—flowering
plants and variegated foliage house plants will need a spot near a window.
Good hanging basket plants:
Chlorophytum
Callisia
Fuchsia
Hedra
Hoya
Lobelia
Pelargonium
Philodendrons
Setcreasea
Tradescantia
Zebrina
Scindapsus
Asparagus
Begonia
Zebrina
Episcia
Pilea
Campanula
Sources
:
Department of Floriculture and landscaping, TNAU, Coimbatore
www.rhs.org
www.wikipedia.org
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2021.