ORGANIC FARMING :: Success Stories
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Miscellaneous
|
Gallery
|
Contact
Organic Farming :: Success Stories
Success Stories
1. Eco-friendly
technologies for rice cultivation
2. Eco-friendly method of setting up vermicompost
unit
3. Ginger
garlic extract: A Bio-pesticide for organic cultivation
4. Organic
farming in banana a profitable venture
5. Organic practices for increasing mango yield
6. Alphonso
mango ideal for organic farming
7.
'Kamakama' income from curry leaves - An acre Rs.1,00,000..!
8.
Crop yield competition winner in organic paddy cultivation
9.
Successful Organic Rice Cultivation !
1.
Eco-friendly
technologies for rice cultivation
A sound package of eco-friendly technologies to grow rice is
being successfully adopted by a few progressive farmers in Puliangudi village
in Tirunelveli district of Tamil Nadu. "The technologies work well with
indigenous rice varieties such as Kitchili Samba. The cost of cultivation is
substantially reduced and the organic rice fetches a premium price in the
market," says Mr. P. Gomathinayagam, a pioneer in organic farming in
Puliangudi.
"I grew a medium-duration (140 days) Kitchili Samba rice
in about 1.6 hectares. The seeds were treated with
Panchakavya,
and the
nursery was treated with plenty of tank silt and a host of organic amendments.
Liberal quantities of tank silt were applied and green leaf
manure was incorporated a few days ahead of the final ploughing. Biogas slurry
was applied through irrigation when the seedlings were just establishing in the
main field," he explained.
One round of spray with 3 per cent solution of Panchakavya was given 20 days after transplanting. On the 30th day, a combination of
coconut milk and butter milk, mixed in equal volume, in ten times their volume
of water was sprayed on the crop to promote active plant growth and tillering.
On the 40th day, another round of spray with
Panchakavya
(3 per cent solution in high volume spray) was given. A bio-insect repellent
was sprayed on the 45th day of transplantation.
The crop was regularly irrigated, and a grain yield of about 6
tonnes was expected from the 1.6 hectare plot. He also was assured of high
quality straw for his cattle.
The cost of cultivation worked out to Rs. 14,000 for 1.6
hectares. "I sell the output as organic rice at a rate of Rs. 30 per kg,
and it makes organic rice cultivation more rewarding economically as well environmentally,"
pointed out Mr. Gomathinayagam. He is championing the cause of organic farming
in the southern districts of Tamil Nadu. Several farmers are following his
advice.
"I adopted the organic rice farming technologies and
harvested about 9.25 tonnes of paddy a hectare from the bold grained Trichi-1
variety. I dumped liberal quantities of daincha in the field and allowed it to
decompose well in the field ahead of planting.
There was no need for any plant protection also. The cost of
cultivation worked out to Rs. 12,500 per hectare. I also harvested plenty of
healthy straw for our animals," said Mr. V. Antonysamy, a progressive
farmer of Puliangudi village.
2.
Eco-friendly method of setting up vermicompost
unit
Vermicompost is the basic ingredient for successful organic
farming. More than 85 per cent of organic crop cultivation depends on it.
Usually farmers across the country build a roof either with thatched straw or
asbestos sheets as a cover for their vermicompost manufacturing unit.
The bottom of the unit will either have sand or plain cement
or sometimes toughened red soil.
A progressive organic farmer, Mr. D. Bharani of Mayiladuthurai
taluk in Tamil Nadu’s Nagapattinam district, has used local tree trunks for
the four poles supporting his rudimentary compost unit.
Climbing tendrils
“The tree trunks absorb the moisture from the compost unit and
grow as individual trees,” he says. For the roof, he has used the climbing
tendrils of vegetable plants growing near the compost unit.
The plants grow well, absorbing the required moisture from the
unit and their leaves provide shade to the manufacturing unit.“In addition to making the compost which I sell at Rs 5-8 per
kg, I am also able to sell vegetables such as bhendi, brinjal, snake gourd and
bitter gourd grown on the roof of the compost shed,” he says.
“Farmers, instead of spending money on constructing thatched
sheds and asbestos, can follow simple methods like this. By doing so, they can
get double income from the compost unit and the vegetables.”
He is also cultivating rasthali banana variety in about four
acres. “Commercially, rasthali has a good demand in the market compared to
other varieties and if consumers know that it is grown organically, then the
farmer need not search for buyers. It will be vice-versa,” he says.
Sturdy against winds
But why did he choose rasthali variety when there are so many
other varieties? “Rasthali variety does not grow quite high and is often sturdy
against strong winds.”
Strong winds often uproot banana trees and farmers have to tie
each tree to a wooden pole to prevent the tree from falling or getting
uprooted. “Secondly organic practices are found ideal for my banana
orchard as banana is often found susceptible to wilt disease which is a major
and fatal infestation.
“Chemical control methods have not been found successful in
controlling this infestation, compared to organic methods,” he explained.“I had purchased the suckers from known sources and from
healthy trees. The suckers, before planting were dipped in a solution of 10 per
cent Panchagavya and 50 gm of pseudomonas for 3-5 minutes.
For an acre, about 780-800 pits of 8x8 (row to row and plant
to plant) were dug and the suckers were planted in them. About 3 kg of farm
yard manure (FYM) was also applied in each pit.
Heat generation
The FYM was applied a little distance away from the pit,
because if it were applied directly into the pit or near the suckers it would
spoil the plant growth due to heat generation. Panchangavya spray was
done once every month till the crop was about 5 months old.
He was able to harvest his first yield in about 14 months
after planting and this variety can be maintained for two years.
“One bunch was sold for Rs. 120-130 and I was able to get a
net income of Rs. 80,000.“The expenditure for maintaining one tree comes to about Rs.
35 and after deducting the expenses for all my plants I am still able to get a
net profit of Rs. 50,000.” he said.
For more information Mr. D. Bharani can be contacted at
Kothangudi village, Komal post, Mayiladuthurai taluk, Nagapattinam district,
Tamil Nadu: 609-805, phone: 04364-228711 and 04364-237415 and mobile:
9486278569.
3.
Ginger
garlic extract: A Bio-pesticide for organic cultivation
Organic practices avoid investment on costly chemicals Ms. Rajareega at her farm in Sivaganga
district, Tamil Nadu seen manufacturing the botanical pesticides.
There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that in the
past 4-5 decades there has been an excessive dumping of chemical toxins on the
soil. As a result the soil has become barren and ground water toxic, in many
places.
Contrast this with organic inputs that are safe, non toxic,
and cost much less. For example, if using chemical pesticides and fertilizers
for growing a crop in a hectare works out to about Rs.6,000-7,000 the cost of
growing the same crop using organic inputs may come to only about Rs.500 - Rs.
1,000, according to Ms. Rajareega of Raasi organic farms at Muthupatti village
in Sivaganga district, Tamil Nadu.
Lower cost
Even if some critics say that organic farming cannot provide
the same high yields as chemical farming, the organic farmers argue that at
least their land is safe; that they have not invested in buying the chemicals
and increasing their cost of cultivation.“If you look at the suicides by farmers, then you will
understand that all those farmers who committed suicides have built up huge
debts.
The debts kept growing because of borrowing at high interest
rates for buying these chemicals which promised to increase the yield. In the
end, it only increased their debts,” she explains.
“If only farmers use safer and natural pest repellents and
manures then where is the question of debt and suicides,?” she enquires.
She has been using only organic manures and bio-repellents
made from locally available resources.
Five leaf extract
For example she uses 5 different leaf extracts (
eindhu ilai
karaisal
in Tamil) derived from
Calotropis
(called
y
erukku
in Tamil),
Jatropha curcas
(
kattu amanaku
in Tamil), Neem (
vembu
in Tamil), Guduchhi/Amruth (
seenthil kodi
in Tamil), Chaste tree (
nochi
in Tamil), Malabar nut (
adathoda
in Tamil), Kalmegh (
siriyanangai
in Tamil), Clerodendron (
peenarisanghu
in Tamil) and Usil (
arappu
in Tamil). These plants are commonly found in all villages. About 1 kg of
leaves from each plant is taken and powdered and then ground into a paste. It
is then mixed with 5 litres of cow’s urine.
The concoction is then diluted in 5 litres of water and left
undisturbed for 5 days. When required for using about 500 ml of this concoction
is diluted in 10 litres of water and sprayed over the plants, she explains.
Ginger garlic extract
Another tried and proven mixture she uses is ginger garlic extract
(called
inji poondu karaisal
in Tamil). About 1 gm of ginger and garlic
each, 2gm of green chilli and 5 litres of cow’s urine and water are taken. The
garlic, ginger and green chilli are ground into a paste and mixed with cow’s
urine and water. After 10 days the mixture is filtered and used. The prescribed quantity is about 500 ml of this solution
diluted in 10 litres of water which can be sprayed over the plants.
Ideal spraying time
The ideal time for spraying these karasals is during 6 am to
8.30 am and between 4 pm and 6.30 pm. Depending upon the soil, crop and other
climatic factors the concentration can be raised or lowered.
Farmers can contact their nearby organic farmers who are using
these karaisals or can contact Ms. Rajareega for guidelines regarding the
concentration.
Effective control
Both the above karaisals have been found effective in
controlling leaf roller, thrips, mealy bugs, fruit, stem and bark borer, hairy
caterpillar and aphids.
Even if a farmer is not convinced about the benefits of
organic inputs he can continue to grow his crops using chemicals, but at the
same time he can set aside a small portion in his field to grow the same crop
using organic inputs. By doing so he can find out for himself the cost benefit
ratio. That itself can convince him of its efficacy.
Readers can contact Ms. Rajareega, Raasi organic farms,
Muthupatti, via Kallal, A. Siruvayal (post), Sivaganga district, Tamil Nadu,
email: rajareega@rediffmail.com, mobile: 9865-582142 and phone: 04565-284937.
4.
Organic
farming in banana a profitable venture
Organic farming is the in-thing now in Thanjavur district- the
rice bowl of Tamil Nadu. Having used chemical fertilisers for some years,
farmers are now reverting to organic farming.
Nearly one hundred farmers of Thanjavur district were given a
first hand idea of how successful is organic farming by the Central Bank of India
recently. They were taken to TARI high-tech horticulture farm at Marunkulam,
where banana, maize and paddy were raised using organic farming.
According to Kulandaisamy, a progressive farmer and owner of
TARI high-tech horticulture farm, organic farming helps to increase the yield
and nutritive value. In his farm at Marunkulam he has raised banana crop using
organic fertilisers. He found that the yield and quality of the crop was good.
He has raised Rasthali and robust variety of bananas on 1.5
acres and three acres respectively in his farm adopting organic farming
methods.
With respect to Rasthali, a bunch has five to six hands (hands
means seeppu in Tamil), instead of three to four hands, which are normally seen
in ordinary cultivation.
The bunch has adequate space between hands and hence the fruit
is big, says Mr. Kulandaisamy pointing to the big bunch of bananas in his farm.
A bunch weighs 20 kgs and fetches Rs. 200.In the case of Robust variety (green
banana) he has resorted to a high density cultivation with 1600 plants in an
acre. In the case of Rasthali he has gone for 1000 plants in an acre.
Robust variety of banana has 12 to 15 hands in a bunch and the
bunch weighs 30 to 35 kgs.
Fertiliser used by Kulandaisamy was composed organic matters,
neem, pancha kavya prepared using cow's urine and cow dung, etc.
As a farmer who is practising integrated farming, he has a
dairy farm from where he produces panchakavya and uses the cowdung generated in
the dairy for organic farming.
What about marketing of bananas produced under organic
farming?
They fetch a premium price and already a shop in Chennai
selling organic produce has booked for bananas. He is also selling the bananas
to Tiruchi market.
He has also gone for maize in two acres of land under organic
farming and paddy in two acres under organic farming.
He says that `Rasthali', which is normally prone to wilt
attack is free from the disease in organic farming. "There is a tendency
even now among farmers to go for chemcial fertilisers. This has to be
discouraged and they should be enlightened about organic farming," says
Mr. Kulandaisamy.
Another uniqueness of Mr. Kulandaisamy is that he produces
liquid bio-fertilisers. He has put up a plant under the New Anna Marumalarchi
Scheme for Rs.1 crore and is producing liquid bio-fertilisers. An innovative
farmer, Kulandaisamy has raised Vanila on one acre of land.
He has spent Rs.9 lakhs for infrastructure alone to raise the
sensitive crop.
The crop is irrigated using micro-sprinklers under a shade net
in a conditioned atmosphere. "Vanila can be a profit-oriented venture when
raised as an inter-crop in coconut," says Kulandaisamy.
5.
Organic practices for increasing mango yield
Mango trees respond well to organic manure applications.
Organic manures such as vermicompost,
panchagavya
and vermiwash are used
for promoting healthy tree growth and fruit formation.
Essential nutrients
From the initial planting stages to caring of full-grown
trees, Panchagavya and vermicompost can be effectively used to supply
essential nutrients to the trees and prevent pest infestations, according to
Dr. S. Sundaravadivel, Vermitechnologist and Environmentalist based in Chennai.
Vermicompost is prepared by using earthworms. Vermiwash is the
liquid collected after the passage of water through a column of activated
earthworms. It is very useful as an organic spray for all crops.
Pest
repellent
Panchagavya is an organic growth promoter, which is
prepared by mixing cow dung, cow urine, cow's milk, curd and ghee in suitable
proportions, and is sprayed on the plants. It contains several macro,
micronutrients, beneficial bacteria and fungi, which aid in growth promotion
and act as effective pest repellents.
It can be prepared by thoroughly mixing five kilos of fresh cow
dung and one litre of cow's ghee in a plastic or cement tank or earthen pot.
The mixture is stirred daily for three to four days."About three litres of cow's milk, two litres of cow's
curd, three litres of sugarcane juice, three litres of tender coconut water and
10 to12 bananas are mixed well and added to the mixture. The entire concoction
is allowed to ferment for fifteen days," said Dr. S. Sundaravadivel.
The container should be covered with a net (or) cotton cloth
to allow aeration of the fermenting unit, according to him. The concoction is
stirred two or three times a day for about fifteen days and then used. For
mango trees of about 6-7 years age, vermicompost may be applied at the rate of
10 kilograms per tree and one litre of
panchagavya
diluted in 30 litres
of water may be sprayed over the foliage (crown) and at the base of the tree.
Spraying Panchagavya over the crown and at the base of the tree must be
done four to five times, according to Dr. Sundaravadivel. The first spraying
must be done before the flowering season (January-March) to increase flower
formation.
A second spraying must be done after 15-20 days. The process
must be repeated till the flowers turn into small sized buds. Once the buds
start forming then the application can be done once a month, according to him.
Use of Panchagavya and vermicompost has been found to
increase the size, number and enhance the colour of the fruits.
Recommended practice
The recommended practice for one hectare of mango trees is
about 25 litres of panchagavya (mixed in 750-800 litres of water) and
four to five tonnes of vermicompost.
Spraying panchagavya has been found effective in the
control of fruit fly menace, a common infestation in all fruit bearing trees,
according to Dr. Sundaravadivel.
According to him, trees treated with organic manures bore
large sized leaves and formed a dense canopy with profuse rooting systems. The
taste and shelf life of the fruits were also found to be more satisfactory.
Nitrogen-fixing bacteria
"The interaction of the root hairs of these trees with
the organic manures also increased the activity of the nitrogen-fixing bacteria
in the soil.
"The organic manures also act as a carrier medium for the
development of several beneficial micro organisms such as
azospirillum,
azotobacter, rhizobium and phosphobacteria
," he said. Dr. S.
Sundaravadivel can be reached by mobile at 98843-90104 ,and email:
sundaravadivel66@hotmail.com.
6.
Alphonso
mango ideal for organic farming
Alphonso, the king of mango varieties, does well under organic
farming conditions in Kanchipuram and Thiruvallur districts of Tamil Nadu, and
its full potential should be exploited by the small and marginal farmers in the
districts, says Mr. S. S. Nagarajan, Vice President (Agricultural Research),
TAFE (Tractors and Farm Equipment Limited), Chennai.
An authority on mango cultivation, and a pioneer in
establishing the largest `Rumani' orchard in Kanchipuram district at `J-Farm',
Kelambakkam, Mr. Nagarajan has successfully demonstrated the promises held out
by the superior mango variety `Alphonso'. "After working with `Rumani'
variety in the last thirty five years, I shifted my focus to `Alphonso' variety
in 1998, and it has done exceedingly well in the farm. It responded favourably
to drip irrigation and organic inputs, and yielded high quality sweet fruits of
attractive aroma," explains Mr. Nagarajan.In about 0.8 hectares in
`J-Farm' he planted 140 Alphonso grafts got from a nursery in Dharmapuri
district. This variety is suited for high density planting, and it will
make up for the low yields in the initial few years of bearing.
The regular
bearing commences from the ninth or tenth year of planting," he points
out. Every young plant was regularly manured in August with liberal quantities
of ripe farmyard manure along with 400 g each of Azospirillum and
Phosphobacterium. Drip irrigation to provide 25 litres of water per tree per
day was established. All other regular orchard practices such as clipping the
sprouts below the graft union, weeding and hoeing in the basins, and ploughing
the interspaces and plant protection with eco-friendly botanical insecticides
were adopted.
"During the first five years Daincha was raised as
rainfed crop, and ploughed in situ as an organic nutrient supplement. Groundnut
was grown as an irrigated crop in the interspaces, and haulms were incorporated
in to the soil as green leaf manure. Of the 140 trees, 112 trees started
yielding in the fifth year after planting, and on an average each tree yielded
about 70 fruits each weighing about 250 g. In all about 2000 kg fruits were
harvested and it fetched Rs. 12 per kg at the farm gate. The gross income in
the first year of bearing is Rs. 24,000, and the cost of cultivation in the
first five years worked out to Rs. 24,000'', he said.
"The quality of the fruits were of superior quality, and
they were sweet and free of spongy tissues. The results were quite
encouraging," says Mr. Nagarajan. The trees would yield as high as 3000 kg
from the 0.8 hectares from the sixth year of planting, and it would fetch a
handsome profit to the growers. As the tree grows, the yield will go up, and a
thirty year-old tree would produce as much as 2500 quality fruits, according to
him. `J-Farm' has perfected the organic farming practices for raising Alphonso
mango, and the farmers should benefit from it, according to him. Farmers,
however, should avoid using chemical fertilizers and fruiting hormones to get
quick returns from the variety, as they may prove harmful in the long run, he
says "Alphonso is an excellent variety for export and if grown
organically, its value in the export market will go up significantly,"
explains Mr. Nagarajan.
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Miscellaneous
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2009-16