Horticulture :: Plantation Crops :: Oilpalm
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Plantation Crops :: Oilpalm
OILPALM
(Elaeis
guineensis)
Palmae
Oil Palm
A Map of World Palm Oil Output
Palm Oil Production
Plantation
Fruit of the Oilpalm
Oilpalm Parts
Varieties –
Dura,
Tenera, Pisifora
Types
Climate:
Temperature is 210 C to 320C,
annual rainfall - 200 cm and relative humidity - 75 – 100 %. Altitude – 450
-900 m above MSL.
Soil:
Moist deep, loamy soils, rich in humus
with good water permeability are suitable. Soil pH - 4 - 6
Nursery techniques:
Fruits are separated from the bunch. Remove the exocarp and mesocarp with
knife. Dry the seeds on concrete or wooden floors under shade for 2 days and
stored for 3-9 months. Seeds are soaked in water for 5 days (changing the water
daily) and spread out to dry for 24 hours. Dried seeds are put in 250 gauge and
23 X 13 cm size polythene bags filled with top soil, sand and well decomposed
cattle manure in equal proportions and placed for germination. Germination
(90-95 %) starts 10-12 days. Apply fertilizer mixture containing 15:15:6 of NPK
@ 8 g in 5 litres of water for 100 seedlings
Nursery
Planting:
Pit size 60 cm3. Planting can
be done in triangular system with spacing of 9 m x 9 m x 9 m, accommodating 140
palms/ha, May-June is the suitable season for planting.
Mulching:
Empty bunches, male flowers, coconut
husk, sugarcane trash can be used as mulch.
Irrigation :
Yielding palm of 3 years age and above –
minimum of 150 litres/day.
Drip irrigation: 5 hrs of irrigation per
day using 4 drippers per palm @ 8 litres of water /hr/dripper.
Ablation:
Removal of all inflorescences during the
initial three years to gain adequate stem girth, vigour and root system.
Ablation is done at monthly intervals by pulling out the young inflorescence.
Manuring:
For five year old palm, apply 50 kg
compost of FYM or grenn leaves may be applied.
Fertilizer schedule:
N: P: K : Mg So4 (g/palm/year)
1st year = 400:200:400:125
2nd year = 800:400:800:250
3rd year onwards =
1200:600:1200:500 (2 equal split doses on July- Aug & Dec - Jan)
Fertilizer Application
Nutrients - functions and deficiency
symptoms
The effect of major nutrients on
growth and yield of oil palm has been studied in most of the oil palm growing
countries in Asia and Africa.
a) Nitrogen:
In oil palm, characteristic yellowing
symptoms are developed under N deficiency conditions. Nitrogen is found to be
essential for rapid growth and fruiting of the palm. It increases the leaf
production rate, leaf area, net assimilation rate, number of bunches and bunch
weight. Excessive application of nitrogen increases the production of male
inflorescence and decreases female inflorescence thereby reducing the sex
ratio.
b) Phosphorus:
In oil palm seedlings, P deficiency
causes the older leaves to become dull and assume a pale olive green colour
while in adult palms high incidence of premature desiccation of older leaves
occurs. Phosphorus application increases the bunch production rate, bunch
weight, number of female inflorescences and thereby the sex ratio. However,
lack of response to P due to P fixation in soils is very common in the tropics.
Eventhough the main effect of phosphorus on the productivity of the palm has
not been significant in most studies, it gives a positive interaction with
nitrogen and potassium.
c) Potassium:
When potassium is deficient, growth
as well as yield is retarded and it is translocated from mature leaves to
growing points. Under severe deficiency, the mature leaves become chlorotic and
necrotic. Confluent orange spotting is the main K deficiency condition in oil
palm in which chlorotic spots, changing from pale green through yellow to
orange, develop and enlarge both between and across the leaflet, veins and fuse
to form compound lesions of a bright orange colour. Necrosis within spots is
common, but irregular. Mid crown yellowing is another prominent K deficiency
condition of the palm in which leaves around the 10th position on the
phyllotaxy become pale in colour followed by terminal and marginal necrosis. A
narrow band along the midrib usually remains green. There is a tendency for
later formed leaves to become short and the palm has an unthrifty appearance
with much premature withering.
Potassium removal is large compared to
the normal exchangeable K content in most top soils. It is mostly required for
the production of more number of bunches, maximum number of female
inflorescences, increased bunch weight and also for increasing the total dry
matter production and yield.
d) Magnesium:
In adult oil palm and in seedlings in
the field, severe Mg deficiency symptoms are most striking and have been named
as ‘orange frond’. While the lower most leaves are dead, those above them show
a gradation of colouring from bright orange on the lower leaves to faint yellow
on leaves of young and intermediate age. The youngest leaves do not show any
discolouration. The most typical Mg-deficiency symptom is the shading effect in
which the shaded portion of the leaflet will be dark green while the exposed
portion of the same leaflet is chlorotic. Heavy rates of K applications induce
Mg-deficiency, particularly on poor acid soils.
Among the secondary nutrients, calcium
and sulphur and probably chlorine, may not pose much problems to oilpalm
cultivation in the country.
e) Micronutrients:
Micronutrient elements, iron,
manganese, copper and zinc are not generally found limiting in the nutrition of
oil palm on acid soil conditions. Boron deficiency is occasionally found on
young palms in the field showing a reduction of leaf area in certain leaves
producing incipient ‘little leaf’, advanced ‘little leaf’ with extreme reduction
of leaf area and bunching and reduction in the number of leaflets and
‘fish-bone’ leaf. The ‘fish-bone’ leaves are abnormally stiff with leaflets
reduced to projections. Leaf malformations including ‘hook leaf’ and corrugated
leaflets are some other associated symptoms. Soil application of 50 - 200 g
borax decahydrate, per palm, depending on age, and severity of symptoms is
practiced for correcting the malady.
Maintenance of paths
In young plantation, the maintenance
of paths is important for inspection and in later years for harvesting. This is
carried out by timely weed control as done in the case of ring weeding.
Ablation
The bunches produced initially will be
very small and have low oil content. Removal of such inflorescences is called
ablation or castration. Removal of all inflorescences during the initial three
years is found to improve vegetative growth of young palms so that regular
harvesting can commence after three and half years of planting. Ablation is
done at monthly interval by pulling out the young inflorescence using gloves or
with the help of devices such as narrow bladed chisels. Ablation improves
drought resistance capacity of young palms by improving shoot and root growth
especially in low production areas where dry condition exists.
Leaf pruning:
Severe pruning will adversely affect both
growth and yield of palm, cause abortion of female flowers and also reduce the
size of the leaves. It was suggested that the palms aged 4 – 7 years should
retain 6-7 leaves per spiral (48-56 leaves), those aged 8 – 14 years 5-6 leaves
per spiral (40- 49 leaves) and those above 15 years should have 4-5 leaves per
spiral (32 – 40 leaves).
Cover cropping:
Pueraria
phaeseoloides, Calopogonium mueconoides, Centrosema prutascens, Mimosa invisa,
Mucana sp.
Insect
pollination in oil palm
The oil palm, hitherto though to be
wind pollinated, has been now proved to be an a insect pollinated species. From
West Africa, the original home of oil palm,
eight species of pollinating weevils were reported. Occurence of
Eldeidobius
kamerunicus
in the oil palm plantations of Kerala was introduced during
1985 from where it was introduced and got established in little Andamans during
1986. The weevils are dark brown in colour. Adult weevils feed on the anther
filament. Eggs are deposited inside the male flowers and larva feeds on the
spent flowers. Life-cycle is completed within 11 to 13 days. Males live longer
than females. The activity of the insects is in accordance with the receptivity
of the male and female inflorescences. It was roughly estimated that 40 palms
in a grove might be the minimum to sustain a sufficiently high continuous
population of pollinators to pollinate. All are receptive female inflorescences.
The weevils carry maximum pollen during the third day of antheses. Antennae,
rostrum, thorax, legs etc. are the main sites of pollen land.
Introduction of weevil in India
increased the fruit let from 36.8 percent to 56.1 percent resulting in 40 per
cent increase in F/B ratio. The maximum attainable pollination potential was as
much as to cent percent with 57 percent increase in FFB weight.
Plant
Protection
Pests:
Rhinoceros
beetle:
Trap the adults with fermented castor cake or pheromone bait. Use
Bio agents like virus (Baculovirus oryctes) and Fungi (Metarrihizium
anisopliae). Treat the compost pit with Carbaryl or Quinalphos @ 0.025 % to
kill the young stages of pest.
Red palm weevil:
Removal of
damaged and rotten bunches and apply tar to the wounds and cuts on the stem
portion to avoid egg laying. Trap the adult beetles using pheromone baits.
Diseases:
Stem wet
rot:
Removal of infected portion and protective covering with
Carbendazim (1%)
paste.
Bud rot disease:
The
affected crown should be removed and drenched with Carbendazim or Thiram @ 0.1
%.
Basal stem
rot:
Removal and destruction of diseased palms. Apply 5 kg of Neem cake
per year per tree.Root feeding with Calixin 10 ml or 10 g Aureofungin sol in
100 ml of water per tree per year.
Harvesting:
First
harvest can be done 3.5 to 4 years after planting. Few ripe fruits are
loose/fall off indicates the bunch is ready for harvest. In Young palms, Chisel
harvesting is followed. If palms become taller (from 10th year onwards), then
harvesting is done by hook. Harvesting rounds should be made as frequent as
possible to avoid over ripening of bunches. Harvesting rounds of 10-12 days are
generally practiced. During rainy season harvesting rounds of 6-7 days are
followed.
Ideal stage of harvesting in Oil palm
Yield:
25 – 30
tonnes of fresh fruit bunches/ hectare.
Bunches
Harvesting
Single Bunch
Fruits
Seeds
Empty Fruit Bunch
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2008 - 2024.