ORGANIC FARMING :: Manures
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
Organic Farming :: Organic Inputs and Techniques
Manures
Manures are plant and animal wastes that are used as sources
of plant nutrients. They release nutrients after their decomposition. The art
of collecting and using wastes from animal, human and vegetable sources for
improving crop productivity is as old as agriculture. Manures are the organic
materials derived from animal, human and plant residues which contain plant
nutrients in complex organic forms. Naturally occurring or synthetic chemicals
containing plant nutrients are called fertilizers. Manures with low nutrient,
content per unit quantity have longer residual effect besides improving soil
physical properties compared to fertilizer with high nutrient content. Major
sources of manures are:
Cattle shed wastes-dung, urine and slurry from
biogas plants
Human habitation wastes-night soil, human urine,
town refuse, sewage, sludge and sullage
Poultry Jitter, droppings of sheep and goat
Slaughterhouse wastes-bone meal, meat meal,
blood meal, horn and hoof meal, Fish wastes
Byproducts of agro industries-oil cakes, bagasse
and press mud, fruit and vegetable processing wastes etc
Crop wastes-sugarcane trash, stubbles and other
related material
Water hyacinth, weeds and tank silt, and
Green manure crops and green leaf manuring
material
Manures can also be grouped, into
bulky organic manures and concentrated organic manures based on concentration
of the nutrients.
Bulky organic manures
Bulky organic manures contain small
percentage of nutrients and they are applied in large quantities. Farmyard
manure (FYM), compost and green-manure are the most important and widely used
bulky organic manures. Use of bulky organic manures has several advantages:
They supply plant nutrients including micronutrients
They improve soil physical properties like structure,
water holding capacity etc.,
They increase the availability of nutrients
Carbon dioxide released during decomposition acts as a
CO2 fertilizer and
Plant parasitic nematodes and fungi are controlled to
some extent by altering the balance of microorganisms in the soil.
Farmyard manure
Farmyard manure refers to the
decomposed mixture of dung and urine of farm animals along with litter and left
over material from roughages or fodder fed to the cattle. On an average well
decomposed farmyard manure contains 0.5 per cent N, 0.2 per cent P2O5and
.0.5 per cent K2O.The
present method of preparing farmyard manure by the farmers is defective. Urine,
which is wasted, contains one per cent nitrogen and 1.35 per cent potassium. Nitrogen
present in urine is mostly in the form of urea which is subjected to
volatilization losses. Even during storage, nutrients are lost due to leaching
and volatilization. However, it is practically impossible to avoid losses altogether,
but can be reduced by following improved method of preparation of farmyard
manure. Trenches of size 6 m to 7.5 m length, 1.5 m to 2.0 m width and 1.0 m
deep are dug.
All available litter and refuse is mixed with soil and spread in
the shed so as to absorb urine. The next morning, urine soaked refuse along
with dung is collected and placed in the trench. A section of the trench from
one end should be taken up for filling with daily collection. When the section
is filled up to a height of 45 cm to 60 cm above the ground level, the top of
the heap is made into a dome and plastered with cow dung earth slurry. The
process is continued and when the first trench is completely filled, second
trench is prepared.
The manure becomes ready for use in about four to five
months after plastering. If urine is not collected in the bedding, it can be
collected along with washings of the cattle shed in a cemented pit from which
it is later added to the farmyard manure pit. Chemical preservatives can also
be used to reduce losses and enrich farmyard manure. The commonly used
chemicals are gypsum and superphosphate. Gypsum is spread in the cattle shed
which absorbs urine and prevents volatilization loss of urea present in the
urine and also adds calcium and sulphur. Superphosphate also acts similarly in
reducing losses and also increases phosphorus content.
Partially rotten farmyard manure has
to be applied three to four weeks before sowing while well rotten manure can be
applied immediately before sowing. Generally 10 to 20 t/ha is applied, but more
than 20 t/ha is applied to fodder grasses and vegetables. In such cases
farmyard manure should be applied at least 15 days in advance to avoid
immobilization of nitrogen. The existing practice of leaving manure in small
heaps scattered in the field for a very long period leads toloss of nutrients. These
losses can be reduced by spreading the manure and incorporating by ploughing
immediately after application.
Vegetable crops like potato, tomato, sweet-potato, carrot,
raddish, onion etc., respond well to the farmyard manure. The other responsive
crops are sugarcane, rice, napier grass and orchard crops like oranges, banana,
mango and plantation crop like coconut.
The entire amount of nutrients present in farmyard manure is
not available immediately. About 30 per cent of nitrogen, 60 to 70 per cent of phosphorus
and 70 per cent of potassium are available to the first crop.
Farm yard manure
Sheep and Goat Manure
The droppings of sheep and goats contain higher nutrients
than farmyard manure and compost. On an average, the manure contains 3 per cent
N, 1 per cent P2O5 and 2 per cent K2O.It is applied to the field in two ways.
The sweeping of sheep or goat sheds are placed in pits for decomposition and it
is applied later to the field. The nutrients present in the urine are
wasted
in this method. The second method is sheep penning, wherein sheep and goats
are kept overnight in the field and urine and fecal matter added to the soil is
incorporated to a shallow depth by working blade harrow or cultivator or
cultivator.
Poultry Manure
The excreta of birds ferment very quickly. If left exposed,
50 percent of its
nitrogen is lost within 30 days. Poultry manure contains higher nitrogen and
phosphorus compared to other bulky organic manures. The average nutrient
content is 3.03 per cent N; 2.63 per cent P2O5 and 1.4
per cent K2O.
Concentrated organic manures
Concentrated organic manures have higher nutrient content
than bulky organic manure. The important concentrated organic manures are
oilcakes, blood meal, fish manure etc. These are also known as organic nitrogen
fertilizer. Before their organic nitrogen is used by the crops, it is converted
through bacterial action into readily usable ammoniacal nitrogen and nitrate
nitrogen. These organic fertilizers are, therefore, relatively slow acting, but
they supply available nitrogen for a longer period.
Oil cakes
After oil is extracted from oilseeds, the remaining solid
portion is dried as cake which can, be used as manure. The oil cakes are of two
types:
Edible oil cakes which can be safely fed to livestock; e.g.:
Groundnut cake, Coconut cake etc., and
Non edible oil cakes which are not fit for feeding
livestock; e.g.: Castor cake, Neem cake, Mahua cake etc.,
Both edible and non-edible oil cakes can be used as manures.
However, edible oil cakes are fed to cattle and non-edible oil cakes are used
as manures especially for horticultural crops. Nutrients present in oil cakes,
after mineralization, are made available to crops 7 to 10 days after
application. Oilcakes need to be well powdered before application for even
distribution and quicker decomposition.
Jatropha oil cakes
Pongamia oil cakes
Cotton seed oil cakes
The average nutrient content of different oil-cakes is presented
in the following table.
Average nutrient
content of oil cakes
Oil-cakes
Nutrient
content (%)
N
P2O5
K2O
Non
edible oil-cakes
Castor cake
4.3
1.8
1.3
Cotton seed
cake (undecorticated)
3.9
1.8
1.6
Karanj cake
3.9
0.9
1.2
Mahua cake
2.5
0.8
1.2
Safflower
cake (undecorticated)
4.9
1.4
1.2
Edible
oil-cakes
Coconut cake
3.0
1.9
1.8
Cotton seed
cake (decorticated)
6.4
2.9
2.2
Groundnut
cake
7.3
1.5
1.3
Linseed cake
4.9
1.4
1.3
Niger cake
4.7
1.8
1.3
Rape seed
cake
5.2
1.8
1.2
Safflower cake
(decorticated)
7.9
2.2
1.9
Sesamum cake
6.2
2.0
1.2
Other Concentrated
Organic Manures
Blood meal when dried and powdered can be used as manure.
The meat of dead animals is dried and converted into meat meal which is a good
source of nitrogen.  Average nutrient
content of animal based concentrated organic manures is given as follows.
Animal based concentrated organic manures
Horn and hoof meal
Raw bone meal
Crushed bone meal
Average nutrient content of animal based concentrated organic manures
Organic
manures
Nutrient
content (%)
N
P2O5
K2O
Blood meal
10 - 12
1 - 2
1.0
Meat meal
10.5
2.5
0.5
Fish meal
4 - 10
3 - 9
0.3 - 1.5
Horn and Hoof meal
13
-
-
Raw bone meal
3 - 4
20 - 25
-
Steamed bone meal
1 - 2
25 - 30
-
Source
Reddy, S.R.2005. Principles of Agronomy.
Kalyani Publisher, Ludhiana.
http://swastikbone.com/images/products/large/bonegrist.jpg
http://swastikbone.com/images/products/large/horns.jpg
http://swastikbone.com/images/products/large/hoofs.jpg
http://swastikbone.com/images/products/large/crushedbone.jpg
http://swastikbone.com/images/products/large/Bone-Meal.jpg
http://www.komitkompost.co.uk/images/pile321241.jpg
http://www.idrc.ca/openebooks/337-9/f0026-03.jpg
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
© TNAU 2008-2024 All Rights Reserved..