Glossary :: L
Land Capability
Classification
Land
capability classification is based on the assumption that every hectare of land
should be used in accordance with its capability and limitations. Land is
classified according to the most suitable, sustained from erosion or other
deterioration. The factors determining land capability classification are major
soil characteristics of the land including: texture to top soil and subsoil,
slope, extent of erosion, degree of wetness, susceptibility to overflowing and
flooding.
Lactation
The time between calving that a cow
produces milk, usually 10 months.
Lamb
A young sheep, less than one year
old.
Legume
A
family of plants, including many valuable food and forage species, such as
peas, beans, soybeans, peanuts, clovers, and alfalfas. They can convert
nitrogen from the air to build up nitrogen in the soil.
Land
preparation
It is the breaking open
of the land, primarily by ploughing, to make it fit for cultivation. The need
for good root system with roots spreading evenly for the absorption of water
and nutrients for the plant makes land preparation an essential part of the
cultivation process. Land preparations also helps check erosions as it
increases the intake rate of water by soil and causes obstruction to surface
flow. The objectives of land preparations are: to ensure that the soil has a
fine texture, so that there is good seed formation and proper root development;
to form an impervious barrier which assists in the retention of water, so that
the soil moisture is efficiently used by crops; to destroy weeds. This is
especially important for dryland crops where there are too many weeds competing
for too little water.
Land
reclamation
Making land capable of
more intensive use by changing its character and/or environment through such
operations as land clearing, controlling erosion, construction or irrigation
reservoirs etc.
Landslide
Rapid
movement down slope of a mass of soil, rock and debris.
Lay-by
application
Application
of herbicides after the last cultivation in fields.
Layering
A method of propagation
by which a shoot is included to root while still attached to the mother plant.
LEISA
Low-external-input and
sustainable agriculture, in which most of the inputs used originate from the
own farm, village, region or country, and deliberate action is taken to ensure
sustainability.
Ley
farming
This is a crop rotation
system in which a grass-legume mixture is grown in rotation with agricultural
crops. The system is sometimes called “ alternate husbandry “ or mixed farming.
The grass-legume mixture is called the ley. The grass improve the soil
structure and prevents erosion while legume enriches soil nitrogen. Ley farming
is economical for rainfed farmers as they need not invest much in nitrogen
fertilizer input plant for food grain crops but can depend on the nitrogen built
up by pasture legumes. In rainfed farming, it has been observed that stylosanthes
hamata raised for a period of 2-3 years in a 4 yearly period would help in
building soil nitrogen to the extent of 35 kg per hectare. With this a farmer
need not use any nitrogen for the subsequent sorghum crop.
Long day
(LD)
One
that is stimulated by long days to initiate some process usually flowering.
Looping
Removal
of unwanted branches or twigs.
Lysimeter
An
instrument for measuring the rate of percolation of rain through a soil.