Glossary :: B
Biological control
Controlling
plants, diseases, and animal pests using natural enemies; or inhibiting the
reproduction of pests by methods that result in the laying of infertile eggs,
etc.
Biological Diversity
Richness
and abundance of species, and variety of natural communities. Both the number
of species and the number of individuals within each species are important in
considering the extent of biological diversity in an area. Also referred to as
biodiversity.
Boar
A sexually mature male hog.
Breeding Stock
Sexually mature male and female
livestock that are retained to produce offspring.
Bench Terrace
Constructed to make
sloppy land cultivable or stable and consists of a series of platforms or
mostly level benches cut into the hill slope in a step like formation; the
platforms being separated by very steep sides by rock or vegetation.
Biodynamic
Forming
A holistic system of
agriculture devised by Rudolph Steiner that seeks to connect nature with cosmic
creative forces. An attempt is made to create a whole-farm organism in harmony
with its habitat. Compost and special preparations (e.g., plant-derived sprays)
are used. Synthetic fertilizers and pesticides are avoided.
Biofertiliser
Fertilizer containing
micro-organisms, the action of which renders the minerals available to plants,
e.g., rhizobia, azotobacter, PSB etc.
Biological
control (pests)
The
use of natural enemies to control pests, including both controlled with
imported natural enemies and augmentation and conservation introduction,
augmentation, and mass release of natural enemies parasites, predators and
disease organisms through manipulation of the pest host, the environment and/or
the enemies themselves (IASA 1990).
Blue
green algae
An heterogeneous group
of prokaryotic photosynthetic organisms which contain chlorophyll. They include
unicellular colonial and filamentous species. They are obligate phototrophs and
store cyanophcean starch. They are non-symbiotic, free living Nitrogen fixers
which grow very well in water logged soils like in rice fields. Beside fixing
atmospheric Nitrogen, Blue-green algae secrete vitamins and growth promoting
substances which contribute to better growth of the rice plants.
Broadcasting
The process of
scattering of agricultural inputs, such as seed, fertilizer and manure on the
surface of the soil by, and/or by implements to provide uniform distribution of
materials over the entire field.
Bund
An artificial earthen
embankment made across sloping agricultural land to cut short lengthy soil
slopes and reduce run-off and erosion.
Bund
former
An implement used for
making bunds or ridges by collecting the soil. Bunds are required to hold water
in the soil thereby conserve moisture and prevent run off.