ORGANIC FARMING :: Frequently Asked Questions
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
Organic Farming :: Frequently Asked Questions
Other Related Questions
What is
organic agriculture?
Organic food production is based on a
system of farming that mimics natural ecosystems that balance pest and
beneficial organism populations and maintain and replenish fertility of the
soil.  The term ‘organic’ in the United States is applied to the
agricultural products produced on farms that adhere to the USDA’s National
Organic Program (NOP) Rule.
How
do organic farms manage fertility?
Organic farmers manage crop nutrients
through a crop rotation that includes cover crops and the application of plant
and animal organic matter, generally in the form of compost. Appropriate tillage
and cultivation practices improve soil structure, organic matter content and
soil microbial life. Mined minerals, and a few allowed synthetic substances are
permitted as supplemental sources of nutrients, provided that soil, crop, and
water contamination are avoided.
Do organic
farmers take any precautions when they apply manure on organic farms?
Yes. Raw manure and other animal and
plant material must be handled in a way that prevents water, soil and crop
contamination. In order to be applied without a days-to-harvest restriction,
manure must be properly composted. Crops for human consumption that have the
edible portion in contact with the soil – including leafy greens – must be
harvested at least 120 days after the application of uncomposted manure. Other
crops for human consumption must be harvested at least 90 days following the
application of raw manure.
How
are insect pests managed on organic farms?
Organic farm systems protect crop
damage by insect pests primarily through the use of biological and cultural
practices such as crop rotation; diversification; habitat management;
beneficial organism releases; sanitation; and timing.  Some natural
substances, such as botanicals, and a few relatively non-toxic synthetic
pesticides such as soap are permitted by the USDA National Organic Program
Standards when used in conjunction with the farm plan and used according to the
restrictions found on the National List.
How
are weeds managed on organic farms?
Weed management on organic farms
consists of cultural and mechanical techniques such as the rotation of crops
that suppress weeds, mulching, tillage, cultivation, water management, and
manual weeding. Weeds often help to conserve soil, improve organic matter, and
provide beneficial habitat for natural enemies on organic farms. Plastic
mulches are permitted provide they are removed at the end of the season.
Insects and diseases can help to keep certain weed populations in check. There
are a few natural substances that are also used to manage weeds, but the efficacy
of these substances is still subject to question.
How
are crop diseases managed on organic farms?
Soil-borne diseases are managed by
improving organic matter and biological activity. Cultural, biological, and
physical methods such as rotation, sanitation, pruning, and selection of
disease resistant varieties are all part of organic disease management. Some
natural substances, such as clays, and a few synthetic fungicides such as
copper sulfate are permitted by the USDA National Organic Program Standards
when used in conjunction with the farm plan and used according to the
restrictions found on the National List.
What are the
requirements for converting to organic dairy production?
There are two means of converting dairy
animals to organic production:
1) Animals from conventional sources must be maintained under organic
management for 12 months prior to sale of any products as organic. Replacement
animals may be added to the herd after a similar 12-month conversion period.
2) If an entire, distinct herd is converted, a one-time allowance is
granted to permit feeding of up to 20% non-organic feed for the
first 9 months, followed by 100% organic feed for three months. If this
type of conversion is made, all replacement animals must be managed organically from
the last third of gestation.
How
do organic animals meet their nutritional requirements?
All agricultural products provided in
the feed ration must be organic,
with a limited amount of supplementation and additives. Ruminant livestock must
have a significant portion of their feed needs met by pasture.
How
do producers maintain the health of organic animals?
Livestock health care must be based on
preventive practices, such as balanced nutrition from organic feed, stress
reduction, and preventative practices. Medications on the National List may be
used only when necessary, and may not be administered in the absence of
illness. Antibiotics are not permitted and products from animals treated with
any prohibited medication must be diverted from organic marketing channels.
What
methods are available to manage parasites in organic livestock?
Organic livestock producers rely on
cultural practices to minimize parasite infestations. Synthetic parasiticides
may be used only if they are on the National List and are prohibited for use in
slaughter stock.
What are the
living conditions for organic livestock?
All organic animals are required to
have
access to the outdoors
and exercise areas, and must be provided
with healthy living conditions. Ruminants are also required to have access to
pasture.
What is the National Organic Program?
The National Organic Program (NOP)
consists of the regulations and regulatory agents to establish and protect the
standards for agricultural products labeled as ‘organic.’  These standards
are known as the National Organic Standards. Congress authorized the USDA to
establish the NOP by the Organic Food Production Act of 1990. All organic food
label claims made in the United States must now be backed by valid
certification according to the NOP Rule.
Who
has to be certified?
The USDA regulations require that all
producers and handlers that make an organic claim for their products must be
certified by a USDA-accredited certification agency. The only exceptions are
for small farmers or handlers with less than $5,000 in gross organic sales,
handlers that buy and sell without repackaging or changing form, and retailers
that do not process food.  Exempt operations must maintain records and
follow the exact same production practices as certified farmers in order to
label their products as organic.
Who
does the certifying?
The USDA accredits state, private and
international agencies to certify agricultural products and food as organic
under the NOP.
How long does it take to transition
land farmed conventionally to organic status?
In order to be eligible for organic
certification, land must have had no prohibited materials applied to it for
three
years
immediately preceding harvest.
Must an
entire farm be converted, or can a farm make the transition field by field?
A farm can be converted field by field.
However, to be certified, a field must have distinct, defined boundaries and
buffer zones to protect it from runoff and unintended contamination from
adjoining land. The farm also needs to have facilities and record keeping in
place to ensure and document that organic and non-organic crops are not
commingled.
What are
acceptable sources of animals used for organic meat production?
Slaughter animals can come from any
breeding stock that has been organically managed from the last third of
gestation.
What sources
of poultry are acceptable for organic poultry products?
Poultry must be managed organically
from the second day of life.
Can animals
be converted to organic production at the same time as the land?
Yes. Livestock operations may convert
animals with the land on which they are pastured.
What
does it mean to be ‘certified organic’?
Certified organic means that the food
has been grown and handled according to the National Organic Program Standards
and inspected by independent state or private organizations. Periodic
unannounced inspections are also conducted. Certification includes annual
inspection of all farm fields and facilities, farm activity records, plus
periodic testing of soil, water and produce to ensure that growers and
processors meet National Organic Standards.
How
can I contact an organic certifier?
You may visit the website
www.tnocd.org.
How much
does certification cost?
Each certification body is required to
establish and publish fee schedules that are applied fairly to all applicants.
Fees vary considerably from agency to agency, and depend on the size and type
of organic operation to be certified. Some state departments of agriculture are
offering a significant reimbursement under a federal cost-share program.
Is organic
certification automatically recognized in other states?
All U.S. states and USDA-accredited
certifiers accept certifications issued by USDA accredited or recognized
certification programs. Foreign governments and international certification
bodies have similar organic standards but may insist on additional
certification to confirm operators who export organic products meet their
standards. Some U.S. certifiers offer this additional service.
How
does a farm get certified?
The operator obtains and reads the
National Organic Standards, and conducts a self-assessment to see if the
operation meets these requirements in terms of land history, production
practices, materials used and recordkeeping procedures. In many cases, some
practices and systems need to be modified to comply. Once an operation
complies, the operator then selects an accredited certifier, submits an
application, gets inspected, meets any conditions identified by the certifier,
and obtains a certificate.
What are the
penalties for misuse of the term “organic?”
Any operation that knowingly sells or
labels an agricultural product as “organic,” not in accordance with the Organic
Foods Production Act and the National Organic Standards may be subject to a
civil penalty of not more than $10,000 per violation and criminal sanctions
based on violation of Federal laws governing fraud and false statements.
Must organic
farmers use organic seeds?
The NOP Rule requires that organically
produced and handled seeds be planted when such seed is commercially available
for the variety. Annual transplants must always be organically grown unless the
Secretary of Agriculture in response to a natural disaster or other major
interruption issues a temporary variance. All seed used in organic production
must be untreated, or treated only with substances (such as microbial products)
that are on the
National List
. Farmers are required to use certified
organic seed when it is commercially available. Commercial availability is based
on ability to obtain the seed in an appropriate form, quality, or quantity, as
reviewed by the certification agent.
What is an
Organic Systems Management Plan?
Organic certification requires an
Organic Systems Management Plan, also known as an Organic Farm Plan or Organic
Handling Plan. These documents identify who is responsible for the organic
operation and describe the management and recordkeeping practices to monitor
implementation of that plan. The plan serves as a contract between the operator
and the certifier. Most certifiers assist operators in developing their plan by
providing forms and guidance documents. Organic Systems Management Plans must
be updated at least annually in order to maintain certified organic status.
How does an
Organic Systems Management Plan relate to soil management?
Farmers are required to demonstrate
that they use appropriate tillage and cultivation practices without negative
impacts on soil structure, and manage crop nutrients and fertility using crop
rotations, cover corps, and application of organic materials. There is also a
requirement that soil organic matter be maintained or improved in a manner that
does not contaminate crops, soil, or water by plant nutrients, pathogenic
organisms, heavy metals, or prohibited materials. The farmer must have a system
for monitoring all practices and procedures, as well as records for all farm
inputs, harvest products, and storage facilities.
What
farm inputs are allowed and what materials are prohibited in organic
production?
In general, the NOP allows natural (non-synthetic) substances and prohibits synthetic substances, unless
they appear on the National List.
What
is the National List?
The National List contains the
allowed
synthetic
and
prohibited natural
(non-synthetic) substances that are
exceptions to the general rule for organic production. It is not a
comprehensive list of all approved materials, rather it can be described as an
“open”
list
since it contains only 1) synthetic materials allowed for use in crop
and livestock production and 2) nonsynthetic (natural) materials prohibited for
use in crop and livestock production.
Who
determines if a specific product is acceptable for use on an organic farm?
In most cases, the
certification
agencies
determine whether or not the use of a given input on an farm
complies with organic standards.
Should an
organic farmer plan on what inputs to use in the coming year?
Organic farmers should anticipate
production needs and determine the practices and inputs needed to achieve that
production. All fertilizers and pesticides that a farmer intends to use over a
season must be included in the farm plan. In all cases, a certified farmer
should have any products used on the farm are approved by his/her certification
agent
before
the input is used.
Are there
any further restrictions on the use of fertilizers and pesticides in organic
farming?
Farmers need to be aware of the
limitations of the
National List
when it applies to farm inputs.
Producers may only use substances listed for crop use on crops. For example,
phosphoric acid is permitted in livestock sanitation, but not as a fertilizer.
A material listed for a specific use is restricted to that use, i.e. soap is
listed for insect control but not disease control. Some materials have specific
restrictions, for instance - copper must be used in a manner that minimizes
accumulation in the soil.
What are the
recordkeeping requirements when a farmer uses a material?
Farmers are required to document all
products applied to crop and soil. One must know all of the ingredients in
order to determine whether or not an input complies. Certifiers will review
products themselves or rely on an outside service.
If a
fertilizer is labeled ‘organic,’ will a farmer be able to use it on certified
organic land?
Fertilizer labeling is regulated by
state laws, most of which define organic in a way that is not compatible with
organic standards. Caution is needed in evaluating fertilizer labeled as
organic, as it might include prohibited synthetics such as urea or sewage
sludge.
Can
pesticides be used on an organic farm?
Most pesticides are prohibited for use
in organic production, but a number are allowed with restrictions. In crop
production,
pesticides
must have active ingredients that are either
non-synthetic or on the
National List
, and all inert ingredients must be
non-synthetic or classified as List 4 –(inerts of minimal concern) by the EPA.
What
feed additives and supplements are permitted?
Natural (nonsynthetic) feed additives
and supplements are permitted, as are synthetic substances that are on the
National
List
. These include synthetic vitamins and minerals, which are limited to
the amount necessary for adequate nutrition. Slaughter by-products are
prohibited for feeding to mammals and poultry, and urea and manure re-feeding
is prohibited for all livestock. Synthetic amino acids are not included on the
National
List
, with the exception of a temporary allowance granted for methionine
for use in poultry until October 2005.
What
are we supposed to do when we need to treat a sick animal?
Animals that are sick must be treated.
A producer who withholds treatment from a sick animal to maintain its organic
status can be decertified. If a synthetic animal drug used to treat an animal
does not appear on the
National List
, then the animal must be diverted
to conventional channels.
Are
any parasiticides allowed?
Only one parasicitide, Ivermectin is on
the
National List
. It is restricted for use in dairy and breeding stock
only. Parasiticides are categorically prohibited on slaughter stock.
Will it be possible to tell if a
product meets organic standards just by reading the label?
The
EPA
has implemented a new voluntary labeling program to help
identify products that meet NOP requirements. Approved registered pesticide in
this voluntary program can include the phrase “for organic production” on their
labels. Not all products that are compliant with organic rules will be so
identified.
What does "Certified Organic"
mean?
"Certified Organic" means the
item has been grown according to strict uniform standards that are verified by
independent state or private organizations. Certification includes inspections
of farm fields and processing facilities, detailed record keeping, and periodic
testing of soil and water to ensure that growers and handlers are meeting the
standards which have been set.
Can any type of agricultural product
become certified organic?
Yes, any agricultural product that
meets third-party or state certification requirements may be considered
organic. Organic foods are becoming available in an impressive variety,
including pasta, prepared sauces, frozen juices, frozen meals, milk, ice cream
and frozen novelties, cereals, meat, poultry, breads, soups, chocolate,
cookies, beer, wine, vodka and more. These foods, in order to be certified
organic, have all been grown and processed according to organic standards and
must maintain a high level of quality. Organic fiber products, too, have moved
beyond T-shirts, and include bed and bath linens, tablecloths, napkins, cosmetic
puffs, feminine hygiene products, and men’s, women’s and children’s clothing in
a wide variety of styles.
Are all organic products completely
free of pesticide residues?
Certified organic products have been
grown and handled according to strict standards without toxic and persistent
chemical inputs. However, organic crops are inadvertently exposed to
agricultural chemicals that are now pervasive in rain and ground water due to
their overuse during the past fifty years in North America, and due to drift
via wind and rain.
Do organic farmers ever use pesticides?
Prevention is the organic farmer’s
primary strategy for disease, weed, and insect control. By building healthy
soils, organic farmers find that healthy plants are better able to resist
disease and insects. Organic producers often select species that are well
adapted for the climate and therefore resist disease and pests. When pest
populations get out of balance, growers will try various options like insect
predators, mating disruption, traps, and barriers. If these fail, permission
may be granted by the certifier to apply botanical or other nonpersistent pest
controls under restricted conditions. Botanicals are derived from plants and
are broken down quickly by oxygen and sunlight.
Why does organic food sometimes cost
more?
Prices for organic foods reflect many
of the same costs as conventional items in terms of growing, harvesting,
transportation and storage. Organically produced foods must meet stricter
regulations governing all of these steps, so the process is often more labor-
and management-intensive, and farming tends to be on a smaller scale. There is
also mounting evidence that if all the indirect costs of conventional food production—cleanup
of polluted water, replacement of eroded soils, costs of health care for
farmers and their workers—were factored into the price of food, organic foods
would cost the same or, more likely, be cheaper.
Is imported organic food produced to
the same standards as that from the UK/EU?
Yes. All organic food must come from
growers, processors or importers who are registered and subject to regular
inspection. Importers must prove:
That the products they wish to import have been produced to
rules equivalent to those laid down in Articles 6 and 7 of Council
Regulation (EEC) 2092/91 (as amended); and were subject to inspection measures equivalent to those laid down in Articles 8 and 9 of Council Regulation (EEC) 2092/91 (as
amended) and that such inspection measures will be permanently and
effectively applied.
I have an urgent import,
can I get my authorisation quickly?
We process applications strictly in the
order in which they are received. There are no exceptions made to this.
If your application is fully completed
and we are satisfied with the information provided, you should get your
authorisation within 10 working days, however, we cannot guarantee that this
will be the case.
Who completes the certificate?
The Certificate will be completed by
the certification body that certifies the exporter of the goods in the third
country or by their properly appointed representative. This body will endorse
the certificate at box 15.
Who keeps the Certificate and for how
long?
The importer is required to retain the
certificate for inspection for at least two years.
What happens if the Certificate is
incorrectly completed or not present at the port of entry?
Failure to provide a correctly
completed Certificate will result in the consignment being refused Customs
Clearance.
You will be given several options:
Store the consignment under customs
control until the certificate arrives or a correct certificate is received.
Remove all references to organic
production from the labelling, packaging and accompanying documents and market
the goods as conventional.
Re-export the consignment.
Destroy the goods.
Is
organic food more expensive?
The packaged, labelled variety is
obviously so. In the developed world this is almost universal because natural
fertilizers and labour costs are high. But in India there are still plenty of
places where you can get cheap organic food and cheap food that uses no
pesticides. In many, many places food is organic by default because the farmer
is growing an indigenous variety of crop that requires no chemical pesticides
or fertilizers.
Is
there a difference between "natural" and "organic" foods?
Yes. The term "natural" is
very broad, and can include organic foods, but not all natural foods are
organic. Natural foods are generally minimally processed and free of artificial
ingredients, but not necessarily organically grown.
Do
organically grown vegetables and fruits need to be washed?
It is a good idea to wash all fruits
and vegetables before eating to help ensure food safety.
But
how can we farm without chemicals?
You can take advantage of what nature
offers and improve it without creating damage. Recycling of organic wastes like
straw and grass and animal excreta makes great fertilizer. Growing the crops
that are native to the region usually ensures that the plants already have high
resistance to the local pests. Pests are reduced through multiple-cropping and
using bio-pesticides. Building up populations of beneficial insects (insects
who feed on bad bugs) is a tried-and-true method of pest control. Prevention is
the organic farmer’s primary strategy.
What
is wrong with normal farming?
Normal chemical farming has much that
is wrong with it. In any case until about five or six decades ago organic
farming was normal farming. Until the Green revolution, that is. Modern
chemical dependent farming has huge ecological costs, is bad for the health of
the farmer and his/her family and affects the health of the people who eat the
food. And most importantly the stuff does not work! Every year the pests grow
resistant to the pesticides and the soil fertility falls.
What
are bio-pesticides?
Bio-pesticides are pesticides derived
from natural materials as animals, plants, bacteria, and minerals. In India, a
range of neem products such as the extracts of neem kernel, the seed and leaf
have created a great deal of interest for being cheap and effective.
What
do I get from organic farming?
First off food is nutritional and safe.
Research shows that organic products have more minerals, less water and less
artificial chemicals. So the taste is generally more natural. Organic
vegetables usually contain higher level of Vitamin C, protein and other
minerals.
Are
there organic farmers in India?
There are a thousand odd registered
farmers in India but there are many more who are organic by default or ideology.
Is
all organic produce "pesticide-free?"
Organic crops can sometimes be exposed
to the traces of agricultural chemicals that are now detected in nearly all
rain and ground water in India, due to their overuse during the past 50 years.
Pesticide residues are rarely detected on organic produce, and are certainly
well below levels on conventionally produced food.
It is not the cost which is important
but the education of consumers backed by will to do so, about the hazardous effects
of chemicals?
There is sometimes apprehension among
farmers that when they switch from inorganic farming to organic farming, thy
may get lower yields. This transition can be successfully tackled by first
switching to sustainable type of Agriculture i.e. including bio inputs along
with inorganic inputs and subsequently reducing the inorganic inputs and
switching to complete organics without any loss in yields, rather improvement
in yields, quality and taste of the produce.
Are genetically modified organisms
(GMOs) used in the production of organic food?
"The Soil Association believes
that genetically modified organisms have no place in organic food or farming
and they are therefore prohibited under the Standards for Organic Food and
Farming" - Soil Association policy statement on genetically modified
organisms.
The Soil Association prohibits the use
of GMOs in organic food production and in animal feed.
How are organic manures beneficial in the cultivation of
crops?
Organic manures increase
the organic matter in the soil. Organic matter in turn releases the plant food
in available from for the use of crops. However, organic manures should not be
seen only as carriers of plant food. These manures also enable a soil to hold
more water and also help to improve the drainage in clay soils. They provide
organic acids that help to dissolve soil nutrients and make them available for
the plants.
How are organic manures differing from fertilizers?
Organic manures have low
nutrient content and therefore need to be applied in larger quantities. For
example, to get 25 kg of NPK, one will need 600 to 2000 kg of organic manure
where as the same amount of NPK can be given by 50 kg of an NPK complex
fertilizer.
The nutrient content of
organic manures is highly variable from place to place, lot to lot, and method
of preparation. The composition of fertilizers is almost constant. For example,
urea contain 46% N regardless of which factory makes it any where in the world.
How much of plant nutrients are provided by organic manures?
Just as different
fertilizers contain different amounts of plant nutrients, organic manures are
also not alike.
Average quality of
farmyard manure provides 12 kg nutrients per ton and compost provides 40 kg per
ton.
Most of the legume green
manures provide 20 kg of nitrogen per ton.
Each ton of
sorghum/rice/maize straw can be expected to add 26 kg of nutrients.
Source
http://www.icrisat.org/vasat/learning_resources/OrganicFAQs/organic_farming.htm
www.mycorrhizae.com
www.hortsorb.com
http://kendujhar.nic.in/
http://www.greenpeace.org
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2009-16