Horticulture :: Medicinal Crops :: Gymnema
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Medicinal Crops ::
Gymnema
GYMNEMA
Madhunashini (Gymneme sylvestre
R.Br.) is an important medicinal climber acclaimed for its anti-diabetic
properties. Its preparations have profound actions on the modulating taste,
particularly suppressing sweet taste sensations. For this reason gymnema
sylvestre is known in Hindi as gurmar or “sugar destroyer”. It is widely found
growing in the tropics of Africa, Asia and Malaysia. In India, this plant is
found growing in abundance in the forests of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Bihar.
Due to its raising demand in South East Asian countries, the plant is becoming
endangered particularly in Tamil Nadu.
Uses:
Gymnema has pronounced effects on
blood sugar, at least among diabetics. Within the past two decades researchers
have determined that gymnema extracts mat even play a role in the treatment of
Type 1 diabetics, who typically need daily injections of insulin to control the
disease. Gymnema taken orally lowers blood glucose levels and improves blood
fat and cholesterol profiles. This climber is extensively used in almost all
the Indian system of medicine as a remedy for rheumatism, cough, ulcer and pain
in eyes. It is also useful in inflammations, dyspepsia, constipation, jaundice
etc., Roots have been reported as remedy for snakebite. The anti-diabetic
property of the plant is attributed to the presence of mixture of triterpines
and saponins in the leaves. These have been designated as gymnemic acids A,B,C
and D, which have the gymnemagenin and gymnestrogenins.
Soil
and Climate:
The
species grows on a variety of soil in different localities. Red sandy loam or
medium deep black soil is reported to be ideal for this crop. The plant is
sensitive to water logging and hence its cultivation on such soil should be
avoided.
Madhunashini prefers tropical and
sub-tropical type of climate. It is found growing even in dry areas also. The
areas with high or medium well distributed rainfall are suitable for its
cultivation.
Types
:
Based
on the leaf size, the climber can be classified into two types.
Small
leaves type: Leaves are oval measuring 1.0-3.5 cm length and 1.5-2.5 cm very
soft, found in dry regions.
Broad
and pubescent type: These leaves are also oval measuring 3-6 cm in length and
3.5-5.0 cm in width. Leaves are dark green compared to small leaf type and also
are pubesecent.
Propagation:
The
plant can be multiplied either by seeds or by stem cuttings.
Propagation
by seeds
The plant bears the fruits during November-December
months. Seeds are collected from freshly harvested fruits. Then they soaked
overnight in water and next day the seeds are sown in the seed pan containing
soil mixed with sand. The seed pans are watered daily and the seeds germinate
in about 15 days. After 40-50 days they are transplanted to polythene bags
containing a mixture of soil, sand and FYM mixed in equal proportion. About 2-3
kg seeds are required for raising one hectare crop.
Propagation
by cuttings
This method is the commercial method. The matured
stem cuttings of 15 cm length are treated with 500ppm IBA for about 18 hours.
Then they are planted in the polythene bags containing equal proportions of
soil, sand and well rotten FYM. Before planting in the polythene bags the
cuttings are also treated with 1 percent Bavistin and have to be watered every
day. Roots develop after ninety days if planting and they are transplanted in
the main field.
Land preparation and planting
Gymnema
is an evergreen climber and the best season for planting is june-july. After
ploughing and leveling of the land, 45cm3 sized pits are made at a
distance of 2.5 m between the rows and 1.75 m between plants (within the row).
The pits are dug open 15 days earlier to planting and are filled with green
leaves and top soil and 2 kgs of well rotten manure per pit. The pits are to be
irrigated and left for one week, and then the rooted cuttings are planted in
the pits.
Training:
Since
gymnema is a climber, it has to be trained on trellies of “Y” shape iron
structure bent at 600 to be sides. The two main stems are trained on
opposite directions. Care should be taken that the climbers should not fall on
to the ground. The climber can also be trained to a wire fence which will serve
double purpose.
Manures and fertilizers:
5t/ha
of FYM is to be applied as basal dose at the time of land preparation. The
inorganic fertilizers application of 95:45:35kg/ha of NPK is recommended.
Interculture:
Irrigation
is given immediately after planting and fertilizers are applied. Later on,
irrigation once in 5-6 days is sufficient. During summer, depending in the
weather condition irrigation frequency needs to be increased. Since, weeds
compete with the plants for water and nutrients, an area of one metre around
the plant needs to be kept clean by hand weeding at periodical intervals.
Plant protection:
Thrips,
mites and green fly are the important insects observed, which can be controlled
by spraying Dimethoate (Rogor 2ml per liter of water). Mites can be effectively
controlled by any Acaricide. To control green fly, monocrotophos can be sprayed
(1 ml/l).
Medicinal
plants require production involving minimal or no usage of chemical pesticides.
Organic practices include control measures using neem based formulations; fish
oil resin soap can be used to manage such sucking pests. Botanicals viz.,
extracts of garlic, Vitex negundo, Lantana camera, Clerodendron inerme,
Calotropis gigantean are often combined and sprayed periodically for
controlling the pests.
Powdery
mildew and leaf spot are the major disease and can be controlled by spraying 3g
of water soluble sulphur (or) 2g of Mancozeb in one liter of water at an
interval of 10-15 days.
Harvesting and yield:
The
crop is ready for harvest during the second year after planting. Leaves are the
economic part and the harvesting of leaves begin when plants start flowering
i.e., during end of June or first week of July. Leaves can be harvested along
with flowers either by hand or can be cut with sicke/knife. The harvested
leaves are dried under shade by allowing sufficient air to circulate by
spreading thinly on clear ground for about 7-8 days. Direct sunlight should be
avoided to maintain the quality of the leaves.
An
average of 5-6 kg dried leaves per plant can be obtained from at 3-4 years old
plant yielding about 10,000 – 15,000 kgs of dried leaves per hectare. The crop
can be cultivated for 10-15 years under good management.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© TNAU 2008-2024 All Rights Reserved.