G20 - Agriculture Working Group
कृषि एवं किसान कल्याण विभाग
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS
WELFARE
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
कृषि एवं किसान कल्याण मंत्रालय
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
India's Presidency
About G20
Agriculture
Working Group
AWG – India’s
Presidency
Officers in charge
AWG - Events and Host Cities
Calender
Events & Side Events
Host Cities
AWG - Resources
Press Release
Documents
Photo Gallery
Video Gallery
Announcements
Partners
Language
Hindi
English
About
G20
G20 or a Group of Twenty is an intergovernmental forum comprising 19 countries and the
European Union (EU). It works to address major issues related to the global economy, such as
international financial stability, climate change mitigation, and sustainable development.
The G20 is composed of most of the world's largest economies, including both industrialised
and developing nations; it accounts for around 80% of gross world product (GWP), 75% of
international trade, two-thirds of the global population, and 60% of the world's land area.
Hence, authors call the forum as “The G20 and the Future of International Economic
Governance” book by Mike Callaghan & Tristram Sainsbury and “G20 Governance for a Globalized
World” book by John J. Kirton.
G20 works with two tracks and one group namely: Finance Track, Sherpa Track and Outreach/
Engagement Group
Agriculture Working Group
Agriculture Working Group (AWG) was established in the year 2011, sixth meeting
of G20 during Cannes Summit, France. Formation of AWG was the outcome of this summit, most
notably in the area of agriculture and food security with a special launch of Agricultural
Market Information System (AMIS) and the endorsement of an Action Plan on Food Price
Volatility and Agriculture as tangible steps to address the world agriculture and food
challenges.
AWG – India’s Presidency
Aligning with India’s G20 Presidency theme of ‘One Earth, One Family, One Future’, the
Agriculture Working Group (AWG) aspires to enhance cooperation among G20 nations. The summit
provides the member countries with an opportunity to coordinate at the policy level to work
towards achieving global economic stability and sustainable growth. Concerning agriculture,
the current challenges that member nations face are food insecurity, gaps in the global
value chain, crop productivity due to climate change, and employment. Through the Issue
note, the aim is to address these challenges
Officers in Charge
Shri Manoj Ahuja, Session Chair, AWG-G20
Secretary, DoA&FW, MoA&FW
Shri Rakesh Ranjan, Additional Secretary
Dr. Pramod Kumar Meherda, Additional Secretary
Dr. Smita Sirohi, Session Co-chair, AWG-G20
Joint Secretary
Shri Ritesh Chauhan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rabindra Prasad, AWG-G20, Director
Shri Muktanand Agrawal, Director, Logistics
Shri Pankaj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri Shashank Sahu, Under Secretary
Ms. Parul Jain, Assistant Director (IC)
AWG - Events Calender
Side Events
1st, ADM
Event 1:
Stock taking of G-20 initiatives in Agriculture
Event 2:
Global Forum on Climate Smart Agriculture for Food Security
Event 3:
Exhibition
AWG - Events and Host Cities
Event
Department
Dates
Cities
1st Agriculture Deputies Meeting (ADM), Indore
DA&FW
13-15 February 2023
Indore
2nd Agriculture Deputies Meeting (ADM)
DA&FW
29-31 March 2023
Chandigarh
Meeting of Agricultural Chief Scientists (MACS)
DARE
17-19 April 2023
Varanasi
3rd ADM* & G-20 Agriculture Ministers Meeting (AMM)
DA&FW
15-17 June 2023
Hyderabad
Indore is a district of Madhya Pradesh state in central India.
The city is named after its Indreshwar Mahadev temple.
Indore was also known as Holkar state, a kingdom in India that belonged to the
Holkar dynasty of Maratha Empire.
Majestic palace, scenic beauty of patalpani falls and tincha falls adds to the
warmth of the city.
Varanasi, a city on the banks of river Ganges is the oldest city of India.
With around 2000 temples, the “City of Temples” is famous as Spiritual Capital
of the country.
It is sought after by people from all walks of life, who are on the path of
‘sadhna’ spiritual discipline and penance.
Located at the foothills of Shivaliks, Chandigarh, derives its name from the
temple of “Chandi Mandir.”
It is one of the best experiments of urban planning and modern architecture in
India.
It has been included in the list of world’s renowned cities for its quality of
life and is the capital of two states Punjab and Haryana.
Hyderabad is the capital and largest city of the Indian state of Telangana and
the de jure capital of Andhra Pradesh.
It is also known as “City of Pearls” and a Biryani paradise.
It is known to have the largest film city in the world i.e. Ramoji Film City.
AWG Resources
Press Release
On the first day of the G-20 meeting in Indore, the delegates took a heritage walk of the city
Madhya Pradesh CM says protecting the health of the earth is our highest duty
Deliberations on agriculture were at full swing on the second day of the 1st Agriculture Deputies Meeting (ADM) at Indore
Jyotiraditya Scindia Pushes for Adoption of 'Smart, Sustainable & Serving All' Strategy in Agri Ecosystem
Documents
G20
Presidency Information Note
PIN-01
Millets
PIN-02 Stocktaking Exercise
PIN-03 Agribusiness and Digital Connectivity
Chair's Summary and Outcome document, Varanasi
Side Events Information Booklet
Administrative Circular, Indore
Administrative Circular, Chandigarh
TAP Presentation
Wheat Initiative Presentation
PARM Presentation
TPFLW Presentation
GEOGLAM Presentation
IFPRI Presentation
OECD Presentation
ERIA Presentation
World Bank Presentation
Cropin Presentation
BMGF Presentation
ADB Presentation
Photo Gallery
1st Agriculture Deputies Meeting
Indore
Show More
2nd Agriculture Deputies Meeting
Chandigarh
Show More
Agriculture Minister's Meeting
Hyderabad
Show More
Video Gallery
Announcements
Administrative Circular of Agriculture Working Group for 1st ADM
Read More
Tweets by g20org
Tweets by AgriGoI
Partners
Knowledge Partner
Institutional partners
Website Content Managed by Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare | MoA&FW | Government
of India, India
Designed and Developed by DAD/IT, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi, India.
Visitors :