Horticulture :: Vegetables::Elephant yam
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Vegetables :: Elephant yam
Elephant yam (
Amorphophallus companulatus
Blume)
Araceae
Varieties
Gajendra and Sree Padma are the popular cultivars.
Soil
A rich red-loamy soil with a pH range of 5.5-7.0 is
preferred. It is a tropical and subtropical crop. It requires well distributed
rainfall with humid and warm weather during vegetative phase and cool and dry
weather during the corm development period.
Season and planting
It undergoes a dormancy period of
45 to 60 days. Traditionally farmers take advantage of the dormancy period by
planting during February-March so that the setts would sprout with the
pre-monsoon showers. April – May is the planting season. The tuber is cut into
750-1000g small bits in such a way that each bit has atleast a small portion of
the ring around each bud. Whole corms of 500 g size can also be used as a
planting material. Use of cormels and minisett transplants of 100 g size as
planting material at a closer spacing of 45 x 30 cm is also suggested. There
are also projections with tender buds called “Arumbu”. These are removed before
planting as they do not give vigorous growth.
An ordinary sized yam gives about 6 to 8 bits for planting. The cut
pieces are dipped in cow dung solution to prevent evaporation of moisture from
cut surface. In some places, the small round daughter corms are also planted.
The cut pieces are planted in beds at 45 cm x 90 cm spacing or pit of 60 x 60 x
45 cm size is dug and planted. The pit should be filled with top soil and farm
yard manure (2kg/pit) prior to planting. The pieces are planted in such a way
that the sprouting region (the ring) is kept above the soil. About 3500 kg of
corms will be required to plant one hectare. Sprouting takes place in about a
month.
Preparation
of field
The land is brought to fine tilth and form beds of
convenient size.
Planting
The cut pieces are planted in beds at 45 cm x 90 cm
spacing. The pieces are planted in such a way that the sprouting region (the
ring) is kept above the soil. Sprouting takes place in about a month.
Intercropping
Vegetable
cowpea var. CO 2 is recommended as suitable intercrop in elephant foot yam. It
can be intercropped profitably in coconut, arecanut, rubber, banana and robusta
coffee plantations at a spacing of 90 x 90 cm. Half quantity of FYM (12.5 t/ha)
and one third of NPK (27:20:33) will be sufficient for the intercrop.
Irrigation
It
is mostly raised as a rainfed crop. However, irrigation is required when
monsoon fails, where it is grown on a large scale. Water stagnation is harmful
to the crop. Wherever irrigation facility is available, irrigation can be given
once a week.
Application
of fertilizers
Apply
25 tonnes of FYM/ha during last ploughing. The recommended dose of NPK/ha is
80:60:100 kg. Apply 40:60:50 kg NPK/ha at 45 days after planting along with
weeding and intercultural operations. Top dress with 40:50 N and K one month
later along with shallow intercultural operations.
After
cultivation
Weeding and earthing up as and when necessary.
Plant
protection
Disease
Leaf
spot
Leaf spot disease can be controlled by spraying
Mancozeb at 2 g/lit.
Leaf spot disease
Collar rot
The disease is caused by a soil borne fungus
Schlerotium rolfsii. Water logging, poor drainage and mechanical injury at
collar region favour the disease incidence. Brownish lesions first occur on
collar regions, which spreads to the entire pseudostem and cause complete
yellowing of the plant. In severe case, the plant collapses leading to complete
crop loss.
Management
Use disease free planting material, remove
infected plant materials, improve drainage conditions, incorporate organic
amendments like neem cake, drench the soil with carbenilazim or apply
biocontrol agents like Trichoderma harzianumI @ 2.5 kg/ha mixed with 50kg of
FYM (lg/l of water).
Harvest
Harvesting is done on 8 months after planting and
particularly during January - February months. Drying of stem and leaves
indicates the harvesting stage in elephant yam.
Yield
The crop can yield about 30
– 35 t/ha in 240 days.
For seed purpose, the yams can be left in the field itself till
planting the next crop or the lifted yams can be stored in sand or paddy straw.
Updated on : Jan 2016
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2016.