Horticulture :: FAQs_Spices & Plantations
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: FAQs :: Spices & Plantations
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS – SPICES AND
PLANTATION CROPS
SPICES CROPS
1. I am growing curry
leaf and at present that plant height is more than 2 m but the yield is very
low. Is there any important operation for boosting up the yield of crop?
After attaining one meter height, the
terminal bud is cut off to encourage basal branching. A total of 5 – 6 branches
have to be maintained for good yield in curry leaf.
2. My land holdings are
in lower pulneys hills and I would like to grow pepper. In that condition what
kind of varieties can i select for commercial planting?
Panniyur 1. This performs better in
less shady and lower elevation areas.
3. What is the variety
suitable for growing in areca nut plantations?
Panniyur 5 is suitable
4. What kind of
standards or supports can I select for cultivating pepper on
commercial
scale?
Silver oak and Dadap can be selected
5. Is there any
specialized technique for increasing the berry size in pepper?
Spray NAA @ 40 ppm to increase the
berry size.
6. When I sow the fresh
cardamom seeds it shows poor germination percentage.
Suggest
some alternative methods to boost up the germination.
Treat the seeds with Sulphuric acid /
Hydrochloric acid for 20 minutes. Sowing the seeds in beds after washing with
water will increase the percentage of germination.
7. In my cardamom estate
I can notice streaks of yellow to pale green patches on the leaves. How to
control that?
This is mainly due to Katte disease.
This disease is mainly transmitted by banana aphid which can be controlled by
regular spraying of Methyl Dematon 25 EC or Phosphomidon 750 ml/ha.
8. Poor fruit set was
observed in my cardamom estate. Suggest some ways to increase the fruit/capsule
set.
For one hectare, keep 7 – 10 bee hives
to increase the pollination and fruit set.
9. What is the ideal
stage of harvesting in clove?
The flower buds should be harvested
when they are fully mature but before opening.
10. I want to go for
commercial cultivation of nutmeg. What kind of planting materials can I select
for that?
Select grafted nutmeg plants for
planting. If you are going for seedling materials the yield will be commenced 6
-7 years after planting. Moreover it is dioecious in nature there may be chance
of occurrence of male trees. Hence select suitable graft materials for
commercial planting.
11. Most of my nutmeg
plants are male plants and female plants are poor yielder. Is there any
alternative method to convert all the plants into female plants
and
good yielder?
Top working is recommended by
selecting high yielding female scion materials. By adopting this technique all
the male plants can be converted to female plants.
12. Suggest some ways
for getting higher yield in Cinnamon.
Young trees are cut close to the
ground to produce side shoots. By heaping the soil around the stumps, more side
shoots are produced from the base of the trees. This side shoots produce higher
yield in cinnamon.
13. During the time of
harvesting lot of leafy materials are dumped as waste. Can I make use those
leaves in a profitable way?
The leaves are removed or stripped off
from the stem and can be used for the extraction of cinnamon oil by steam
distillation.
14. The harvested garlic
from my field shows rubbery appearance. Is there any control measure for that?
Avoid
excessive application of N to minimise rubberisation. N should not be applied
in the form of Urea.  Use Ammonium
sulphate. Spray 1500 ppm of CCC or MH on 30th day of planting.  Reduce the frequency of irrigation to
minimise rubberisation. Apply 0.2 % Boron 0.1 % Sodium molybdate on 30th,
60th and 90th days after planting.
15. I am sending my
processed turmeric to a factory where they are extracting curcumin on a large
scale. Suggest one variety with high curcumin
content.
Allepy Finger Turmeric (AFT)
16. At the time of
harvest most of the turmeric rhizomes become rotted resulting in fragile
powdery mass of rhizome. How to control that?
i. The seed rhizomes are dipped in
Carbendazim 1 g/lit and Phosalone 35 EC 2ml/lit or Monocrotophos 1.5ml/lit for
controlling rhizome rot.
ii. Drench with Bordeaux mixture 1 %
or 0.25 % of Copper oxychloride.
iii. Treat the rhizomes with 0.3 %
copper oxy chloride for 30 minutes before storage.
17. How can I store the
seed rhizome after the harvest?
The seed rhizomes are stored after
heaping under shade of tree or in well ventilated shade and covered with
turmeric leaves. Some times the heap is plastered with earth mixed cow dung. It
can also be stored in pits with sawdust. The pits can be covered with wooden
planks with one or two holes for aeration.
18. Suggest some best
intercrops for turmeric cultivation.
Onion, Coriander and Fenugreek
19. What are the ideal
standards suitable for vanilla cultivation?
Glyricidia,
Erythrina indica, Jatropha curcus, Plumeria alba, Casuarina equisitifolia
and as
multitier crop in coconut plantations.
20. Whether the
artificial pollination is needed in vanilla cultivation? If so mention the
method of pollination?
Yes. Artificial pollination is needed
for getting higher yield. The artificial pollination is useful in vanilla and
pollination must be done on the same day as flowers opening from 4.00 am to
1.00 pm.  About to 10 to 20 inflorescence
may be pollinated in a vine.   Normally 5
to 6 flowers in the lower side of inflorescence pollinated. Hand pollination
using a needle or a piece of pointed wood or a tooth pick to lift the hood
covering the anther cap. The standards are brought it in to contact with
stigma.  A skilled worker can pollinate
1000 – 1500 flowers in a day.
21. What is the ideal
stage of harvesting in vanilla?
The pods are ready for harvest 6 to 9
months after planting. The matured beans change colour from green to pale
yellow. The right picking stage is when the distal end of the pods turns
yellow.
22. How long I can
maintain the vines? Or what is the economic life of vanilla
vines?
It can be maintained economically upto 12 – 14 years.
PLANTATION CROPS
23. How many leaves
should I harvest for the production of good quality tea?
Two leaf and a bud
24. What is the
harvesting interval for plucking?
During rush period, the harvesting
interval is 7 – 10 days and during lean period at 10 – 15 days intervals.
25. Most of the leaves
in my tea plantations show blister appearance or punctured leaves. Why and what
is the remedy?
This is mainly due to blister blight
of tea. This can be controlled by
i.
Spray 210 g Copper oxychloride and Nickel chloride per ha at 5 days interval
from June - September; 11 days intervals in October and November.
ii.
Hexagonazole 200 ml + Copper oxychloride 210 g 5 days interval/ha.
iii.
Copper oxychloride 210 g + 200 ml Propiconazole / ha 10 days interval.
iv.
Spray Contaf 85 g / Tilt 80 g + 85 g COC at 7 days interval starting from the
onset of monsoon
26. Name some shade
trees suitable for planting in coffee estates?
Dadap and Silver oak are best suited
27. During summer dadap
trees shows scorching symptom? How to control /
overcome
that?
During summer the stem of dadap are
painted with dilute lime or wrapped in agave leaves or polythene sheets to
prevent from sun scorching.
28. For the past two
years I could not get any proper blossom showers during
March
– April. Is there any alternative method for producing the blossom showers?
Sprinkler irrigation during March –
April is the ideal alternative system for blossom showers. After doing this
operation uniform coffee flowering will be notices in the estates.
29. What is the ideal
stage for tapping the rubber?
Trees
attain tappable stage in about 7 years. First tapping in seedling trees will
commence when the trunk attains a girth of 55 cm at 50 cm height from the
ground. In budded trees the girth should be 50 cm at 125 cm height from the bud
union.
30. Is there any method
to increase the latex flow in rubber?
Ethrel is recommended to increase
latex yield of trees tapped on panel D.
It is applied at 5% a.i. concentration with a brush below the tapping
cut to a width of 5 cm after light scraping of the outer bark. The first
application may be done after a drought period preferably after a few
pre-monsoon showers and subsequent applications may be done in September and
November. However, continuous application of Ethrel is not recommended for
periods of more than 3 years at a stretch.
31. During the onset of
monsoon the rubber trees in the estates shows abnormal leaf fall.  Why and how to control that?
This is mainly due to abnormal leaf
disease. This can be controlled by
i. Prophylactic
spraying of the foliage prior to the onset of South-West monsoon with, Bordeaux
mixture 1% at 4000 - 5000 lit/ha using high volume sprayers.
ii. Oil
based Copper oxychloride dispersed in diluent spray oil employing either low
volume air blast sprayers (Micron 420 or Minimicron 77 or Shaw Duster Sprayer)
from the ground or through aerial application.
iii. For
micron spraying on the tree spread, foliage intensity, planting material used
and age of plants, two rounds of spray using about 17 to 22 lit of fungicide
oil mixture per ha per round (1:6 proportion) with gap of 10 to 15 days or a
single round of spray with about 30 - 37 lit of fungicide oil mixture per ha
(1:5 proportion) may be necessary.
32. How long can I
economically tapp / extract the rubber?
Up to 12 -14 years of planting, after that
trees are removed and can be used as timber.
33. Can I use the cashew
seedlings for commercial planting?
No. Graft materials are used for
commercial planting.
34. What kind of
intercrops can I select for cashew orchards?
Ground nut or pulses or minor millets can be grown.
35. Many cashew
plantations are more than 15 years old and the yield of cashew nut is very low.
Is there any alternative method to boost up the yield in
cashew?
Top working is the ideal method to
rejuvenate the senile cashew plantations. In this the main trunk is headed /
cut back to the length of 1 m height from the ground level. The new shoots
emerging from the shoots are used for epicotyl grafting. The scion materials
collected from good yielding plants are grafted by means of epicotyl grafting
method. The newly grafted materials develop canopy within 1 – 2 years of
planting and starts yielding from 3rd onwards. This method can also
be practiced for poor yielding plants.
36. I am residing in
Ramnad district and I am having poor source of water. Whether it is possible to
grow arecanut?
No. it is sensitive to moisture
deficit and should be grown where adequate water facilities are available.
37. What are the
selection criteria for arecanut seedlings?
Arecanut seeds should be collected
from pre-marked, potent mother plant with outstanding performance are selected
for propagation. Seedlings of 1 – 2 years old, dwarf and compact seedlings with
more number of leaves should be selected for planting.
38. From my arecanut
plantations, a lot of leaf sheaths are dumped as waste
materials.
As a scientist suggest some of the ways for economical use of such leafy
wastes.
i. The leaf sheaths can be employed in
the preparation of food plates or cups and can be sold in the market.
ii. Another part is that waste leaf
materials are chopped into pieces and used for compost preparations employing
earth worms. This adds as a additional support or reduce the cost of organic
manures requirement of plantation and the excess can be sold in t he market.
39. Suggest some ideal
locations for growing cocoa.
Cocoa can be grown as intercrop in coconut
and areca nut plantations.
40. I am having farm
holding near to seashore. Whether it is
possible to grow
betel vine?
No. It cannot / does not tolerate
saline and alkaline condition. Hence planting of betel vine is not recommended
for sea shore areas.
41. What kind of support
materials can be used for betel vine cultivation?
Before
the establishment of vines the side branches of Agathi trees upto a height of 2
m are removed for early creeping of the vines.
42. Most of my coconut
plantations sheds more number of buttons and produce smaller grade nuts. Why and
how it can be corrected?
This is mainly due to micronutrient
deficiency and can be corrected by root feeding of coconut tonic.
43. One of my coconut
trees shows triangular cut leaves. Why it happens/ occurs like that?
This is mainly due to Rhinocerous
beetle infestation. This can be controlled by applying a hand full of sand to
the growing tip. Keep coconut toddy mixed with Methyl dematon or Monocrotophos 2
ml/lit during the night time to trap the adult beetles. Manure pits near to the
coconut plantations must be avoided. If it is so, mix or frequently turn the
manures to collect the grubs of Rhinoccerous beetles and destroy them to
control the insect population.
44. Suggest some coconut
varieties suited for rainfed conditions.
VPM 3 and ALR (CN) 1 are suited for rainfed conditions.
45. Is there ant
alternative ways to conserve the moisture in coconut plantations?
Mulching the coconut trees with
coconut husks/ coir pith and burial of coconut husk or coir pith near the tree
basins retains more soil moisture.
46. I want to practice
multitier cropping in coconut plantations. Suggest me some useful and
economical crops for that.
Coconut + banana + sirukizhangu +
bhendi is suitable system for the eastern region. Crops like banana, pepper,
cocoa, nutmeg, vanilla can be tried under multiple cropping system in suitable
areas in the western region. In all the
systems, apply recommended quantity of water and manures and fertilizers to the
intercrops separately.
47. What are the useful
and economical intercrops suited for planting in coconut plantations.
(i) Annuals
: Groundnut, bhendi, turmeric,
tapioca, sweet potato,
sirukizhangu, elephant foot yam, ginger, pineapple
(ii) Biennials
: Banana.  Varieties Poovan and Monthan are suitable.
(iii) Perennials
: Cocoa*, pepper* (Panniyur1 or
Panniyur2 or
Panniyur5 or Karimunda),
nutmeg*
and vanilla*
*Suitable areas in Pollachi tract of western region and Kanyakumari
district.  For vanilla, use disease free
planting material and maintain high vigilance to maintain a disease free crop.
48. Few of my coconut
trees shows webbed appearance in the under surface of leaf and shows patches of
degreening after a few days. What is the reason and how to control that?
This is mainly due to the infestation
of Black headed caterpillar and can be controlled by adopting the following
control measures.
The
incidence of the pest is noticed from the month of November to May and from
August to November after rainfall. The coconut trees of all ages are attacked.
Release
the larval (
Bethylid, Braconid
and
Ichneumonid
) and pupal (
Eulophid
)
on (chalcid) parasitoids and predators periodically from January, to check the
build up of the pest during summer.
Among
the larval parasitoids, the bethylid
Goniozus nephantidis
is the most
effective in controlling the pest. The optimum level of release is 1:8 of
host-parasitoid ratio. The parasitoid should be released @3000/ha under the
coconut trees when the pest is in the 2nd or 3rd instar larval stage.
Parasitoid release trap may be used to release the parasitoid at the site of
feeding. Parasitoids should not be released in the crown region since they will
be killed by predators like spiders and reduviid bugs.
Remove
and burn all affected leaves/leaflets.
Spray
malathion 50 EC 0.05% (1mi/lit) to cover the undersurface of the leaves
thoroughly in case of severe epidemic outbreak of the pest in young palms.
Root
feeding for the control of coconut Black headed caterpillar:
Select a fresh and live root, cut
sharply at an angle and insert the root in the insecticidal solution containing
monocrotophos 36 WSC 10 ml + water 10 ml in a 7 x 10 cm polythene bag. Secure the
bag tightly to the root with a cotton thread. Twenty four hours later, check
whether there is absorption. If there is no absorption select another root.
These methods should not be resorted to as a routine practice and it is
suggested only for cases of severe epidemic outbreak of the pest and when the
survival of the tree is threatened.
49. I can notice gummy
exudation on the main trunk of coconut. Some where in the middle I can find 1-2
holes with some sound. What is the reason and how to control that?
This is mainly due to red palm weevil
incidence. This can be controlled by adopting the following measures
Remove
and burn all wilting or damaged palms in coconut gardens to prevent further
perpetuation of the pest.
Avoid
injuries on stems of palms as the wounds may serve as oviposition sites for the
weevil. Fill all holes in the stem with cement.
Avoid
the cutting of green leaves. If needed, they should be cut about 120 cm away
from the stem.
Fill
the crown and the axils of top most three leaves with a mixture of fine sand
and neem seed powder or neem seed kernel powder (2:1) or lindane 1.3 D (1:1 by
volume) once in three months to prevent the attack of rhinoceros beetle damage
in which the red palm weevil lays eggs.
Plug
all holes and inject pyrocone E or carbaryl 1% or 10 ml of monocrotophos into
the stem by drilling a hole above the points of attack.
Setting
up of attractant traps (mud pots) containing sugarcane molasses 2½ kg or toddy
2½ litres + acetic acid 5 ml + yeast 5 g + longitudinally split tender coconut
stem/logs of green petiole of leaves of 30 numbers in one acre to trap adult
red palm weevils in large numbers.
Install
pheromone trap @1/2 ha
Root feeding:
Select a fresh and live root, cut
sharply at an angle and insert the root in the insecticidal solution containing
monocrotophos 36 WSC 10 ml + water 10 ml in a 7 x 10 cm polythene bag. Secure
the bag tightly to the root with a cotton thread. Twenty four hours later,
check whether there is absorption. If there is no absorption select another root.
These methods should not be resorted to as a routine practice and it is
suggested only for cases of severe epidemic outbreak of the pest and when the
survival of the tree is threatened.
50.
There are some warts or fissures noticed on my harvested coconuts. These coconuts
are smaller in size and fetches low market price. Why?
This
is mainly due to eriophyid mite infestation. The following measures can be
adopted. Package of recommendations for the management of the coconut eriophyid
mite
Manurial and fertilizer
recommendation (Soil application/tree/year)
Urea 1.3 kg
Super phosphate 2.0 kg
Muriate of potash* 3.5 kg
* Increased quantity is recommended to
increase the plant resistance to the mite.
Neem cake application @ 5 kg
Organic manure (well rotten FYM) @ 50
kg
Micronutrients
(Soil application / tree / year)
Borax 50 g
Gypsum 1.0 kg
Magnesium sulphate 500g
Grow sunnhemp as intercrop twice a
year (Seed rate 30 kg/ha)
Spot application of
ecofriendly Botanicals
Round
Eco-friendly Botanical
Quantity / tree
1.
Azadirachtin 1%
5 ml in one lit. of water
2.
Neem oil + Teepol
30 ml in one lit. of water
3.
Azadirachtin 1%
5 ml in one lit. of water
Method of application
The
botanicals should be applied in the sequence indicated above at 45 days interval
using a one litre hand sprayer.  Rocker
or Pedal sprayer can be used for spraying small trees.
The
spray should be applied at the crown region by a climber covering only the top
six bunches during non rainy season.
The
bunches must be covered well by the spray fluid and approximately one litre of
spray fluid may be required per tree
Precautions and safety
measures
Spraying
should be avoided during windy season to prevent contamination.
At
the time of spraying, protective mask and clothing should be used.
Wash
face and hands cleanly with soap after spraying.
51.
I want to establish a coconut nursery? From what type of mother palms or what
are characters must be considered while selecting the mother palms?
1.
Select seed
gardens, which contain large proportion of high yielding trees with
uniformity in yielding ability.  Trees
growing closer to households, cattle shed, compost pits and other favorable
conditions should be avoided.
2.
High yielding
mother palms giving not less than 100 nuts/palm/annum should be chosen for
collecting seednuts. Alternate bearers should be avoided. The age of the palm
chosen be middle age i.e., from 25 to 40 years. Even trees with 15 years age
can be selected, if it is high yielding and has stabilized yield.
3.
The mother palm
should have straight trunk, spherical or semi spherical crown, high rate of
leaf and spathe production, short and stout petiole, more number of female
flowers regular bearing habit, non – buckling bunches, high setting
parentage, medium in nut size, high copra outturn and free from pest and
diseases.  A good regular bearing
mother palm produces on an average one leaf and an inflorescence in its axil
every month. So, there will be twelve bunches of varying stages of maturity
at any one time. Avoid trees producing habitually barren nuts.
4.
Harvest seednuts
during the months of February - August to
get maximum germination and good
quality seedlings. Harvest the bunches intended for seednut by
lowering them to the ground using a rope to avoid injury to seednuts
5.
The seednuts should
be round in shape and when tapped by finger should produce metallic sound.
Fully ripe nuts develop twelve months after fertilisation.
6.
To get more quality
seedlings, the seednuts of tall and hybrid are to be air cured for one month
followed by sand curing for two
months.  For dwarf varieties,
the air curing should be lesser than one month followed by sand curing for
two months.
52.
What are the basic criteria for the selection of coconut seedlings?
Good quality seedlings should possess
at least 6 leaves and the girth of collar region should be 10 cm.
53.
My land holdings are located near coastal regions of Cuddalore. Whether I can
plant oil palm on commercial basis?
No. Gravelly and sandy soils,
particularly the coastal sands are not ideal for oil palm cultivation.
54.
During oil palm flowering I can find more male inflorescence than the female.
Why it is occurring like that?
Water deficiency adversely affects
flower initiation, sex differentiation and these results in lower sex ratio due
to production of more male inflorescence.
55.
I have planted oil palm two years ago. Whether I can allow flowering and fruit
set this year or I should postponed that one. If so, what is the benefit?
The
bunches produced initially will be very small and have low oil content. Removal
of such inflorescences is called ablation or castration. Removal of all
inflorescences during the initial three years is found to improve vegetative
growth of young palms so that regular harvesting can commence after three and
half years of planting. Ablation is done at monthly interval by pulling out the
young inflorescence using gloves or with the help of devices such as narrow
bladed chisels. Ablation improves drought resistance capacity of young palms by
improving shoot and root growth especially in low production areas where dry
condition exists.
56.
How to assess the ripening of oil palm?
Ripeness of
the fruit is determined by the degree of detachment of the fruit from bunches,
change in colour and change in texture of the fruit. Ripening of fruits start
from top downwards, nigrescens fruits turning reddish orange and the virescens
(green) to reddish brown. Fruits also get detached from tip downward in 11 - 20
days time. Ripeness is faster in young palms than in older palms for the
bunches of equal weight. The criteria used in determining the degree of
ripeness based on the fruit detachment are as follows:
a)
fallen fruits: 10 detached or easily
removable fruits for young palms and 5 for adult palms,
b)
number of fruits detached after the
bunch is cut; 5 or more fruits/kg of bunch weight,
c)
quantity of detachment per bunch;
fruit detachment on 25% of visible surface of bunch.
These
criteria could be applied with flexibility.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2014.