Horticulture :: Medicinal Crops :: Sappan Wood
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Medicinal Crops ::Sappan Wood
SAPPAN WOOD
Sappan
wood or East Indian red wood is a multipurpose tree, yielding valuable natural
dyes with medicinal plant properties. In India, it is cultivated in gardens and
nurseries as a live fence plant in parts of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andra
Pradesh and West Bengal.
Uses:
Timber
:
The tree is the source of the commercial redwood or Brazilwood. Sapanwood is
white, heartwood makes upto 90% of the total volume is yellow or deep orange
when fresh turning to dark red. The wood is straight grained with a fine to
moderately fine texture, fairly heavy (600-780kg/m3), hard and
lustrous. It is difficult to dry and susceptible to warping and resistant to
termite attack. It is used for inlaying work, cabinet making, violin bows and
for walking sticks.
Gum or resin :
The stem produces a gum. Tannin
or dyestuff: The heartwood yields a valuable red crystalline dye used on
cotton, silk and wool fabrics. Bakam gives bright red and violet shades, and
with garcine produces a chocolate tint. Bark and pods yield similar dyes, 40%
tannin used for production of light leather goods.
Roots give a yellow dye.
Sappan yields different shades of red with or without mordant. Natural mordant
such as the bark of Lodhara (Symplocos racemosa) and Ebenum (Diospyrose ebenum)
are frequently used to increase the binding potential of the dye
Essential
oil:
Leaves contain a pleasant smelling volatile oil. Medicine: A decoction of
the wood is a powerful emmenagogue and, because of its tannic and gallic acids,
is an astringent used in mild cases of dysentery and diarrhea. It is also given
internally for certain skin aliments. The sappan is given as a tonic to women
after confinement and to relieve vomiting of blood. It is one of the
ingredients in a mixture prescribed for malaria. The dried heartwood is widely
used in oriental medicine, particularly against inflammation. Seeds serve as a
sedative.
Soil
and climate:
It
grows well in all kinds of soil and lushy growth is obtained in red soil. It
withstands drought and defoliates only for a short period of 10-15 days. It
does not tolerate too wet soil conditions. Sappanwood tolerates an annual
precipitation of 700-4300 mm, a mean annual temperature of 24-28oC
and a soil pH of 5-7.5.
Propagation:
Sappanwood
can be propagated by seed and renewed by coppicing. Usually mature pods burst
open in the dry season and scatter the seeds, which remain dormant untill the
start of the rainy season. Pods are gathered, pounded and put into cold water.
Seed germination occurs readily but is enhanced by dipping seeds wrapped in
cotton cloth in boiling water for 5 seconds. Germination rate is 90%.
Usually mature pods burst open in
the dry season and scatter the seeds, which remain dormant until the start of
the rainy season. Seeds germinate immediately if enough moisture is available.
The germination rate is enhanced to about 90% by dipping the seeds into boiling
water for 5 seconds. Usually the plants are grown in the shade of trees in the
forest or in forest borders.
Crop
management:
Initially C. sappan grows straight
but at about 2.5 m height, the branches start to droop with branches of nearby
trees to from thickets, generally free from undergrowth. After the tree is
felled, the stump sprouts profusely within 2 weeks. For use as dyewood, the
tree is harvested every 6-8 years and when the trunk has attained 5-6 cm
diameter. The tree is cut about 1 m above the ground to allow sprouts to grow
from the stump.
Manures
and fertilizers::
5
kg if FYM is applied basally to each plant at the time of field preparation. Except
organic inputs, little or no chemical fertilizers are applied.
Plant
protection:
Pod
borer and termites are the major insects reported. Pod borers can be controlled
by spraying 0.2% monocrotophos during fruiting stage at weekly intervals.
Likewise termites can be controlled by drenching the soil with Chlorpyriphos or
Dursban at 2ml/1 if water.
Medicinal plants require production
involving minimal or no usage of chemical pesticides. Organic practices include
control measures using neem based formulations. Fish oil resin soap can be used
to manage such sucking pests. Botanicals viz., extracts of garlic, Vitex
negundo, Lantana camera, Clerodendron inerme, Calotropis gigantean are often
combined and sprayed periodically for controlling the pests.
Harvesting
and yield:
The main branches along with the
stump are harvested. Average yield of inner pulp is about 80kg/tree. Seeds can
be harvested right from the second year of planting but the heartwood is ready
only after 6-12 years. An yield of 2000-2500kg of pods may be obtained, which
inturn may yield 200-250 kg seeds per hectare. The harvested wood is chipped
into pieces and the dye is extracted boiling them in water. While extracting,
few paddy grains are thrown into boiling liquid to check the completion of the
extraction process. If the husk scales off, boiling is considered sufficient.
The wood dye yield varies with varietal and cultural factors.
Source:
Dr. K. Rajamani, Department of Medicinal Plants,TNAU,
Medicinal plants production towards globalization,
Page no: 107-111.
ISBN no:978-81-905951-1-7
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© TNAU 2008-2024 All Rights Reserved.