Horticulture :: Orchard Management
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Orchard Management
Orchard Management
1.
Establishment of orchard
2.
Orchard cultivation
1.
Establishment
of orchard
Establishment
of an orchard is a long term investment and deserves a very critical planning.
The selection of proper location and site, planting system and planting
distance, choosing the varieties and the nursery plants have to be considered
carefully to ensure maximum production.
Location and site
Proper
selection of site is important. Selection may be made based on the following
criteria.
1.
The location should be in a well established fruit growing region because one
could get the benefit of experience of other growers and also get the benefit
of selling the produce through co-operative organizations with other fruit
growers.
2.
There should be a market close to the area.
3.
The climate should be suitable to grow the chosen fruit crops.
4.
Adequate water supply should be available round the year.
Before
a grower selects a site for establishing a new orchard, he must have assessed
the following factors:
1.
Suitability of soil, its fertility, the nature of subsoil and soil depth.
2.
Site must have proper drainage and no water stagnation during rainy season
3.
Irrigation water must be of good quality.
4.
There must be proper transport facilities either by road or rail within the
reach.
5.
Whether the climatic conditions are suitable for the fruits to be grown and are
whether site is free from the limiting factors such as cyclones, frost,
hailstorms and strong hot winds.
6.
Whether there are seasonal gluts or over production in any particular period of
the year.
7.
Whether there is assured demand in the market for the fruits to be grown.
8.
Whether his orchard is a new venture or whether there are already other
growers.
9. Availability of
labour.
Preliminary
operations
After
selecting the suitable location and site, some preliminary operations have to
be done. Trees are felled without leaving stumps or roots. The shrubs and other
weedy growth are also cleared. Deep ploughing is essential to remove big roots.
The lands should be thoroughly ploughed, leveled and manured. Leveling is
important for economy of irrigation and preventing soil wash. In the hills, the
land should be divided into terraces depending upon the topography of the land
and the leveling is done within the terraces. Terracing protects the land from
erosion. If the soil is poor, it would be advisable to grow a green manure crop
and plough it
insitu
so as to improve its physical and chemical
conditions before planting operations are taken up.
Planning of an
orchard
A
careful plan of the orchard is necessary for the most efficient and economic management.
The following points should be borne in mind in preparing the plan.
1.
Optimum spacing to accommodate maximum number of trees per unit area.
2.
Stores and office building in the orchard should be constructed at the centre
for proper supervision. .
3.
Wells should be located at convenient places in different parts at the rate of
one well for 2 to 4 hectares..
4.
Each kind of fruit should be assigned in a separate block.
5.
Fruits ripening at the same time should be grouped together.
6.
Pollinators should be provided in deciduous fruits. In deciduous fruit trees,
there are some varieties which require pollen from another variety to set
fruits in them, otherwise, they will be barren. Such pollen donors are known as
pollinators..Every third tree in every third row should be planted with a
pollinator.
7.
Irrigation channels should be laid along the gradients for most economical conduct
of water. For every 30m length of channel, 7.5 cm slope should be given.
8.
Roads should occupy minimum space for the economy of transport. The clearance
between wind break and first row of trees is advantageous for the road.
9.
Short growing trees should be allotted at the front and tall at the back for
easy watching and to improve the appearance.
10.
Evergreen trees should be in the front and deciduous ones behind.
11. Fruits attracting
birds and animals should be close to the watchman's shed.
12.
A good fence is essential. Live fencing is economic and cheap to other kind of
fences. The plants suitable for live fencing should be drought resistant, easy
to propagate from seed, quick growing, have dense foliage, should stand severe
pruning and should be thorny.
Agave, Prosopis juliflora, Pithecolobium dulce
and
Thevetia
if closely planted in 3 rows would serve as a good live
fencing.
13. Wind breaks, rows of tall trees planted
close together around the orchard, are essential to resist velocity of wind
which cause severe ill-effects particularly moisture evaporation from the soil.
Since the wind breaks are very effective in reducing the wind velocity and minimizing
the damage to the fruit trees and to other crops, their presence in regions
where strong winds prevail is of paramount importance. A wind break ordinarily
has its maximum effectiveness for a distance about four times as great as its
height but has some effect over twice about that distance.
The
most effective windbreak is a double row of tall trees alternately placed. There
should be at least as much as space between the windbreak and the first row of
the fruit trees as between fruit trees. It is preferable to dig a trench of 90
cm deep at a distance of 3m from the windbreak trees and prune and cut all the
roots exposed and again fill up the trenches. This may be repeated for every 3
or 4 years in order to avoid the compe1ition between the wind breaks and fruit
trees for moisture and nutrition.
Trees
suitable for windbreak should be erect, tall and quick growing, hardy and
drought resistant and mechanically strong and dense to offer maximum resistance
to wind. The trees which are suitable for growing as wind breaks are
Casuarina
equisetifolia, Pterospermum acerifolium, Polyalthia longifolia, Eucalyptus globulus,
Grevillea robusta, Azadirachta indica
etc.
Laying
out of
orchards
Any
method of layout should aim at  providing
maximum number of trees per hectare, adequate space for proper development of
the trees and ensuring convenience in orchard cultural practices. The system of
layout can be grouped under two broad categories viz. (a) vertical row planting
pattern and (b) alternate row planting pattern. In the former planting pattern
(e.g. square system, rectangular system), the trees set in a row is exactly
perpendicular to those. trees set in their adjacent rows. In the latter
planting pattern (i.e. Hexagonal, Quincunx and Triangular), the trees in the
adjacent rows are  not exactly vertical instead
the trees in the even rows are midway between those in the odd rows.
The
various layout systems used are the following:
a) Vertical row
planting pattern
1. Square system:
In
this system, trees
are planted on each comer of a square whatever may be the planting distance.
This is the most commonly followed system and is very easy to layout. The central
place between four trees may be advantageously used to raise short lived filler
trees. This system permits inter cropping and cultivation in two directions.
2.
Rectangular
system:
In
this system, trees are planted on each corner of a rectangle. As the distance
between any two rows is more than the distance between any two trees in a row,
there is no equal distribution of space per tree. The wider alley spaces
available between rows of trees permit easy intercultural operations and even
the use of mechanical operations.
b) Alternate row
planting pattern
3.
Hexagonal
System:
In
this
method, the trees are planted in each comer of an equilateral triangle. This
way six trees form a hexagon with the seventh tree in the centre. Therefore
this system is also called as 'septule' as a seventh tree is accommodated in
the centre of hexagon. This system provides equal spacing but it is difficult
to layout. The perpendicular distance between any two adjacent rows is equal to
the product of 0.866 x the distance between any two trees. As the perpendicular
distance between any two row is less than unity, this system accommodates 15%
more trees than the square system. The limitations of this system are that it
is difficult to layout and the cultivation is not so easily done as in the
square system.
4.
Diagonal or
quincunx system:
This is the square method but with one more plant in the
centre of the square. This will accommodate double the number of plants, but
does not provide equal spacing. The central (filler) tree chosen may be a short
lived one. This system can be followed when the distance between the permanent
trees is more than 10m. As there will be competition between permanent and
filler trees, the filler trees should be removed after a few years when main trees
come to bearing.
5.
Triangular system:
The trees
are planted as in square system but the difference being that those in the even
numbered rows are midway between those in the odd rows instead of opposite to
them. Triangular system is based on the principle of isolateral triangle. The
distance between any two adjacent trees in a row is equal to the perpendicular distance
between any two adjacent rows. However, the vertical distance, between
immediate two trees in the adjacent rows, is equal to the product of (1.118 x
distance between two trees in a row). When compared to square system, each tree
occupies more area and hence it accommodates few trees per hectare than the
square system.
6.
Contour system:
It is
generally followed on the hills where the plants are planted along the contour
across the slope. It particularly suits to land with undulated topography,
wh~re there is greater danger of erosion and irrigation of the orchard is
difficult. The main purpose of this system is to minimize land erosion and to
conserve soil moisture so as to make the slope fit for growing fruits and
plantation crops. The contour line is so designed and graded in such a way that
the flow of water in the irrigation channel becomes slow and thus finds time to
penetrate into the, soil without causing erosion. Terrace system on the other
hand refers to planting in flat strip of land formed across a sloping side of a
hill, lying level along the contours. Terraced fields rise in steps one above
the other and help to bring more area into productive use and also to prevent
soil erosion. The width of the contour terrace varies according to the nature
of the slope. If the slope becomes stiff, the width of  terrace is narrower and vice-versa. The
planting distance under the contour system may not be uniform. In South India, tea
is planted in contours either in single hedge system or in double hedge system.
Double hedge contour planting system accommodates nearly 22 % higher population
than single hedge system. Number of plant population that can be accommodated
in this system is
where
N-
number of hedges
D
- distance between plants
y
- distance between hedges
z
- vertical distance between row
This
system in tea helps to get early, high yield, conserve soil and suppress weed
growth.
In
South Indian hills, peas and beans are sown under paired row system which is
almost similar to double hedge planting system. The seeds are sown at 10 cm
interval in each double row of 30 cm apart with the distance of 1.5m between
each pair of rows.
Planting
distance
The
minimum vertical distance between any two trees or plants is referred as the
planting distance and this varies depending upon many factors. The principles
in deciding the planting distances are the following.
1.
Trees when fully grown, the fringes of trees should touch each other but the
branches should not interlock.
2.
Trees root will spread over a much larger area than top and there should be
proper room for the roots to feed without competition.
Factors
which decide the planting distance are the following.
1.
Kind of fruit trees - mangoes are planted at a distance of 10m x 10m, guavas at
a distance of 5m x 5m while papayas are planted at a distance of 2m x 2m.
2.
Rainfall - wider spacing should be given in low rainfall areas than the high
rainfall areas for a kind of tree.
3.
Soil type and soil fertility - in heavy soils less spacing should be given
because the top and root growth are limited.
4.
Rootstocks - trees of the same variety grafted on different root stocks will
grow to different sizes and as such require different planting distances. eg.
Apple
5.
Pruning and training - trees trained on head system requires closer spacing
than the other type of training system. 6. Irrigation system
In
general, if the spacing is too wide, it is obvious that the yield per unit area
would be greatly reduced. Only in very, exceptional cases would this be
justifiable. Ordinarily it is more profitable to plant the trees closer
together and supply the needed water and food materials. If the trees are too
close together, the trees grow tall rendering pruning,
spraying
and harvesting difficult. There is root competition and inadequate nutrition and
the trees as such give less yield and produce smaller fruits of poor colour.
Cultivation also becomes difficult in the closely planted orchards. Close
planting results in a greater yield per unit area in the early life of the tree
but less in the more important later years.
Close planting .is therefore a false economy.
The
total number of trees per hectare for various important horticultural crops
under a) square b) hexagonal and c) triangular system of planting are given
below:
Crop
Planting distance (in m)
No. of trees per hectare
Square system
Hexagonal system
Triangular system
Mango
10 x 10
100
115
89
Sapota
8 x 8
156
118
139
Clove
6 x 6
277
320
248
Acid
lime
5 x 5
400
461
357
Coconut
7.5 x
7.5
177
205
159
It
may be seen that hexagonal accommodates 15% more number of plants while
triangular system accommodates 11% lesser number of plants. The calculation of
the number of trees per hectare when planted under square or rectangular system
is very easy, and is obtained by dividing the total area 'by the area occupied
by each tree (a x a in square system or l x b in rectangular system). The
theoretical and the actual number of possible trees which can be planted in an
orchard depends upon the shape of the field. In practice, in large fields, the
percentage difference between the theoretical number and the actual number
possible will be less.
High
density planting system
Planting
of fruit trees rather at a closer spacing than the recommended one using
certain special techniques with the sole objective of obtaining maximum productivity
per unit area without sacrificing quality is often referred as 'High density
planting' or HDP. This technique was first established in apple in Europe
during sixties and now majority of the apple orchards in Europe, America,
Australia and New Zealand are grown under this system. In this system, four
planting densities are recognized for apples viz., low HDP (< 250 trees/ha),
moderate HDP (250-500 tree/ha), high HDP (500 to 1250 trees/ha) and ultra high
HDP (>1250 trees/ha). Recently, super high density planting system has been also
established in apple orchards with a plant population of 20,000 trees per ha.
In some orchards, still closer, planting of apple trees is followed (say 70,000
trees/ha) which is often referred as 'meadow orchards'.
Advantages
of HDP are:
(i)
Early cropping and higher yields for a long time; the average yield in apple is
about 5.0 t/ha under normal system of planting and it is about 140.0 t/ha under
HDP
(ii)
Reduced labour costs
(iii)
Improved fruit quality
Characteristics
of HDP are:
a.
The trees ofHDP should have maximum number of fruiting branches and
minimum number of structural branches.
b.
The trees are generally trained with a central leader surrounded by nearly
horizontal fruiting branches. .
c.
These branches should be so arranged and pruned in such a way that each branch
casts a minimum amount of shade on other branches.
d.
The height should be one and half its diameter at the base. A key to successful
HDP depends upon the control of tree size.
This
is achieved by
(a)
Use of size controlling root stocks. In apple, dwarfing root stocks and intermediate
stocks like MM 106, MM 109, and MM 111 are used to control the size of the
plant. In pears, Quince A, Adam and Quince-C are commonly used as dwarfing root
stocks.
(b)
Use of spur type scions - In temperate fruit crops like apple, the cultivars
can be classified into a spur type or non-spur type. The spur types which have
restricted annual growth are alone suitable for HDP.
(c)
Training and pruning methods to induce dwarfness - under Indian conditions,
apple trees trained under spindle bush, dwarf pyramid, cordon systems are found
to contain the growth of the trees appreciably for HDP systems.
(d)
Mechanical device and use of chemicals to control size – Growth regulators such
as daminozide, ethephon, chlormaquat and paclobutrazal are extensively used to
reduce shoot growth by 30 to 0 %. This results in increased flowering in the
subsequent years and may be useful in encouraging earlier commercial fruit
production in strongly
vegetative
fruitful young trees. Besides chemical manipulation, mechanical devices
employing the use of spreaders and tying down the branches to make them grow
from near horizontal to an angle of 45° from the main stem are also some of the
standard practices to control tree size.
Planting system for
HDP:
The success of HDP depends upon the right choice of planting system. Generally,
rectangular planting with single, double and three row plantings are followed.
In single row planting, the distance within the row is close, whereas the
distance between the row is wide (4x2m). In double row planting, a wider
spacing is given after every two rows (4+2x2m) whereas in three row planting, a
wider spacing is given after every three rows (4+2x2x2m). In meadow orchard system,
a bed of 10 to 15 rows is closely planted
(nay
30x45cm) and separated by
alleys of 2.5m width between beds. This system is also called bed system.
Planting
season
The
season of planting varies with different fruits and local conditions. There are
two seasons of planting in vogue in India.
i)
Monsoon (June - August) and
ii)
Spring (February - March)
Monsoon
season is considered to be the best for planting evergreen fruit trees like
citrus, mango, sapota and guava. If the trees are planted early in the rainy
season they soon establish themselves and grow vigorously. Deciduous trees may
be planted during the dormant period without shock. Care should be taken that
planting is done before the
growth
starts, otherwise trees suffer severely and will be in poor condition to
withstand the next hot weather.
Planting
methods
After
locating the positions of the orchard trees, it is important that the trees are
planted exactly where the stakes stood.  It can be easily done with the help of a
planting board. The planting board is usually of 15m long, 10 cm wide and 2.5cm
thick with a central notch and one hole on either end, the central notch and
the two holes (one on either end) are in a straight line. The planting board is
placed in such a way that the stake (tree marker) fits into the central notch.
Two small stakes are inserted one in each end hole. The planting board along
with the tree marker is then lifted straight up without disturbing the end stakes.
A pit of about 1m cube or of the desired dimensions at the position of the tree
marker is then dug.
The
pits are allowed to wither for few weeks before planting in some cases. The
pits are then filled with top soil already mixed with red earth and well rotten
farm yard manure. Irrigation is then applied to enable the contents of the pits
to sett1e down properly. In the event of depressions taking place as a result
of irrigation, more soil should be added to the pits to fill them to the level
of the land. The pits are then  ready for
planting.
Transplanting
The
trees should be planted approximately where the original pegs were placed. This
is achieved by replacing the planting board in position with the help of the
guide pegs and the stem of the trees is brought to the central notch with the
help of a hand hoe.
One
of the most common mistakes is that of planting the trees too deep. The plants
should be sent in such a way that the bud union remains slightly above the ground
level. The trees in the field should be planted as deep as they stood in the
nursery. The trees are irrigated soon after p1anting.This consolidates the soil
and .helps the roots to establish contact with it and to secure a supply of
water quickly. A small basin may be made around the tree for this purpose. Planting
if taken up during the rains, this basin should be demolished within a day or two
so that water will not collect around the tree. This is more dangerous on heavy
than light soils.
Spring
winds cause damage to the growing p1ants by giving a constant shaking
.
To
prevent this, plants should be staked when p1anted. Some young plants are
subject to considerable injury from sunburn particularly if tbey have been trained
to single stem with no branches for 45cm or more from the ground. Such trunk
can be protected by  wrapping them with
paper or other material or by painting  them
with white wash. The latter is probably best, as most materials wrapped around the
trunk would be subject to termite attack.
Top
2.
Orchard cultivation
Orchard
cultivation refers to the careful management of the orchard soil in such a way
that the soil is maintained in a good condition suitable to the needs of the
tree with least expenses. This involves maintenance of the physical condition
of the soil, its moisture and nutrient content. A good system of orchard
cultivation should ensure:
l.
Weed control and saving in moisture and nutrients
2.
Very little disturbance to soil and preventing soil erosion and
3.
Reduced cost of cultivation
Methods of soil
management practices
1. Clean culture
This
type of cultivation is extensively followed in India. This involves regular
ploughing and removal of weeds. The clean culture has many disadvantages. They
are:
i.
Humus will be completely depleted rapidly due to frequent cultivation.
ii.
Frequent cultivation causes injury to the feeding roots, the trees may be short
lived or stunted in growth.
iii.
Clean cultivation aids in more aeration leading to the depletion of nitrogen.
iv.
Hard pan is created in the soil.
v.
Frequent cultivation causes more soil erosion.
The
above mentioned defects in clean cultivation can be minimized by avoiding deep
and frequent cultivation and also cultivation when the soil is too wet.
2. Clean culture with
cover crops
This
type of soil management involves raising of a cover crop or green manure after
removing the weeds. If clean cultivation is attempted during the rains,
considerable erosion is almost sure to occur. It is probably best to plant a
green manure crop between the trees early in the rains and plough it into the
soil towards the end of monsoon season. In India, green manure crops like
Sunhemp, Cowpea, Daincha, Lupins etc. are more commonly used. Legume cover
cropping in grape, mango, guava and other fruit crops is becoming a common practice
in the management of orchards. Cowpea and French beans grow well under guava
and sapota tree. In some places to prevent soil erosion, certain permanent
cover crops like
Calapogonium muconoides, Centrosema pubescens
and
Peuraria
phaseoloides
are raised in the alley spaces. They are leguminous crops,
establish in a short period, dry up during summer to conserve moisture. With
summer showers they come up again because of their profuse seeding habit and
spread themselves as a vegetative mat by the time the heavy monsoon starts
pouring in. Such permanent cover cropping is a common feature in rubber
plantations of Kerala and Kanyakumari district.
Mulching
This
is one of the important soil management practices adopted in certain countries.
Crop residues like straw, cotton stalks, leaves, saw dust, pine needles, coir
dust arid other materials like polythene films or certain special kinds of
paper are spread in the tree basins and in inter spaces between trees. Main
objective of mulching is to conserve soil moisture and to control the weed
growth. The other advantages of mulching are:
1.
Keeps soil cool in day; warm at night hours
2.
Reduces surface run-off
3.
Adds humus to the soil
4.
Prevents soil erosion
5.
Fruits are protected and kept clean since they fall on the mulches
6.
It allows the absorption of more rain water and
7.
It reduces irrigation frequency.
The
following are some of the disadvantages:
1.
Dry materials used as mulches encourage the risk of fire and consequent damage
to trees. .
2.
Thick mulches may act as places for mice and rodents to live and multiply. They
may cause damage to tree trunks and roots by eating the bark and burrowing to
the land. The mulching materials should be placed too close to the tree trunk
and it should be spread in such a way that they give a good cover to the root
system of the trees.
4.
Sod
In
this method, permanent cover of grass is raised in the orchard and no tillage
is given. This type of orchard cultivation is followed in USA and Europe. This
may be useful in slopy lands for preventing soil erosion. But they compete for
soil moisture and available nitrogen. The drawbacks of this system are the need
for increased manuring and water application. They are harmful to shallow
rooted trees. Hence sod may be useful with deep rooted trees because soil
moisture will be very low on the top layers.
5.
Sod mulch
This
is similar to sod with the only difference is that the vegetation is cut
frequently and the cut material is allowed to remain on the ground. This is
slightly better than the previous one, as the moisture loss is not so great as
in sod. In both sod and sod mulch, more nitrogen should be applied to the fruit
trees than usual application because the vegetation utilises more soil
nitrogen.
Intercropping
In
young orchards, the question of how best one can use the soil between the trees
arises. If the trees are properly spaced there is considerable land which will
not be used by the permanent trees for several years. Similarly in the case of
other long duration horticultural crops like tapioca, turmeric, ginger and
banana some area between adjacent plants will be remaining unoccupied by the
main crop for few months. It naturally appeals to the grower to get some return
from this vacant land especially when he is getting no return in the early
periods. The practice of growing any economic crop in alley spaces of the fruit
trees in the first few years or in the' unoccupied spaces of the long duration crop
in the early periods is referred as intercropping. They also act as a covercrop
and the land benefits by the cultivation, irrigation, manuring  given to the intercrops. The following
important principles should be observed while growing intercrops.
1.
lntercrops should not occupy the area where the roots of the fruit trees are
concentrated.
2.
Soil fertility should be maintained or improved when intercrops are grown.
3.
Water requirements of the intercrops should not clash with those of the main fruit
trees. The intercrop may require an irrigation at a time when it would be detrimental
to the trees.
4.
Intercrops should be selected with reference to their effect on soil moisture. Grain
crops remove excessive moisture to the detriment of fruit trees. The intercrops
selected should not exhaust the soil water and nutrients and should not demand
more water than is allowed for fruit trees.
Vegetables
are the best inter crops when compared to millets. But whatever may be the
intercrop grown, it should be kept well away from the main fruit trees and
irrigated independently. The intercropping should be stopped when trees occupy
the entire orchard space. Thereafter, green manuring or cover cropping should
be only practiced.
Many
growers prefer some quick growing fruit trees to grow as intercrops. A satisfactory
fruits are available for this purpose. In temperate regions peaches are often
grown between apple trees. Similarly, in properly spaced mango orchard, guava
trees can be planted to bear in two or three years and will produce a number
of
crops before it is necessary to remove them. Such short-lived trees are
known as
'fillers'
. Papayas, bananas
or phalsa may be well grown as fillers in orchards. The danger in using fillers
is when they are allowed to remain in the orchard for too long periods. As
normally root system makes a faster growth than the branches, the roots
of
the
permanent trees come in contact with the roots
of
the fillers before
there is any crowding above ground. Therefore, the fillers should be removed
after a few years usually immediately after the main fruit trees have commenced
bearing.
The
recommended intercrops for some important horticultural crops are given.
Crop
Age
Intercrop
Mango
Upto 7 years
Leguminous
vegetables, Papaya (filler)
Grapes
Upto 8 months
Snake gourd or
bitter gourd in pandal
Apple, pears
Upto 5 years
Potato, Cabbage
Banana
Upto 4 months
Sunhemp, onion
Tapioca
Upto 3 months
Onion, beans,
lab-lab, black gram
Turmeric
Upto 3 months
Small onion,
coriander
Arecanut
Upto 10 years
Pineapple
Coconut
Upto 3 years
Banana, tapioca,
vegetables
Mixed
cropping
It
refers to the practice
of
growing certain perennial crops in the alley
spaces of the main perennial crops. The main advantage is the effective utilization
of available area and increase in the net income of the farm per unit area. Extensive
research conducted by CPCRI, Kassargode on mixed cropping in coconut and
arecanut plantations showed that cocoa, pepper, cinnamon, clove and nutmeg can
be grown as mixed crops in coconuts while nutmeg and clove as mixed crops in
between four arecanut palms on alternate rows. In all the above cases, increase
in yield (upto 10%) is obtained in the main crop due to the synergistic effect
of  the crop combinations arising out of
beneficial micro organisms in the rhizosphere and the more availability of
major nutrients in the active root zone of the crop mix as compared to the pure
stand.
Multitier
system of cropping
Certain
horticultural plants like coconut and arecanut are grown for about 50 years in
a particular land. It takes nearly 4 to 7 years for the above trees to reach
the bearing stage. Adequate alley spaces (nearly 75%) are available in between these trees and being the palm
trees, their root system will not also spread beyond one metre in diameter.
Hence,
these vacant spaces can be profitably used for raising other crops, thereby
increasing the employment opportunities and profit. This is the chief objective
of the multitier system of cropping. Intercropping and mixed cropping involve
jointly multitier system of cropping and is defined as a compatible companion
of crops having varying morphological frames and rooting habits, grown together
in such a manner that their canopies intetercept solar energy at varying heights
and their roots forage the soil at different zones. The main principle here is
that the land, water and sunlight should be effectively used. An ideal
combination of crops for multitier cropping in coconut and arecanut plantations
is as follows.
Tier
Crop
First
(Top)
Coconut
or arecanut
Second
Pepper
trained over the trunk of coconut or arecanut trees
Third
Cocoa
or cloves planted at the centre of four arecanut or coconut
Fourth
(ground)
Pineapple,
ginger and dwarf coffee
Organic
farming
Excessive
use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides as a mean of intensive cultivation
to boost up our food production have caused considerable damages to our soil
health and the environment. This has been criticized recently by many environmentalists.
This has focused the attention of several experts in ecologically sound viable
and sustainable farming systems, known as organic farming.
It
is a production system which avoids or largely excludes the use of
synthetically compounded inorganic chemicals. This system entirely relies on
crop rotation, crop residues, animal manures, legumes, green manures, off-farm
organic wastes, biofertilizers, mechanical cultivation etc. and aspects of
biological pest control to maintain soil productivity and tilth to supply
nutrients and to control insects, weeds and other pests. This system is often,
referred as 'biological farming'
'regenerative farming' and 'sustainable farming' 'eco friendly farming'
etc.
Organic
fanning is essential because
1.
Chemical fertilizers may have an adverse effect on soil life-they do not supply
humus, have an adverse effect on physical, chemical and biological properties
of soil
2.
Chemical fertilizers are costly.
3.
Indiscriminate application of pesticides could lead to residues in
horticultural crops which are consumed mostly in raw state by us.
4.
The continuous use of pesticides is ecologically unsutainable as pests acquire
resistance.
5.
There is a permium for the horticultural produces which are raised under
organic fanning.
Essential features of
organic farming
1.
Use of organic manures like FYM, compost, vermicompost and.coir compost etc. 2.
Use of biofertilizers. 3. use of green manures and grain legumes. 4.
Non-chemical weed management. 5. Use of botanicals and bio control agents in
the control of crop pests.
In
India, organic farming in horticultural crops especially in vegetable and
spices crops are slowly picking up, wherever premium prices are available for
organically grown quality produces. In certain horticultural crops where
productivity and total productions cannot be compromised by following strict
organic farming practices, a combination of inorganic and organic farming
practices may be followed possibly avoiding known toxic inorganic chemicals.
Source
1. Dr. N. Kumar. 1997.
Introduction to Horticulture
. Rajalakshmi
Publications, 28/5 – 693, Vepamoodu Junction, Nagercoil. Pp: 15.47- 15.50.
Top
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2013.