Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Vertical Gardening
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Vertical Gardening
VERTICAL
GARDENING
Introduction:
The
lack of vegetation in urbanized areas, as result of human establishments,
directly affects the quality of life, from physical and aesthetical point of
view. The construction of vertical gardens is recommended both in interiors and
especially in the exterior of buildings. By applying these technologies, any
kind of area can be used at its maximum capacity, obtaining esthetic valences,
benefic for environment and human health. Even if the price of constructing and
maintaining the vertical gardens is higher than a classical landscape it’s
compensated by the environmental benefits, raising the vegetation surfaces,
with impact for reducing the pollution effect. The new modern concepts for
landscape development are keen on using any kind of concrete or glass, turning
them in real vertical gardens, being possible to overcome the development of
the urban areas making a smooth transition for a healthy green urban
environment.
Vertical Gardening is a special kind of urban gardening suitable to small spaces, particularly for decorating the walls and roofs in various styles. This is an alternative method for gardening by expanding the scope of growing plants in a vertical space. Intensive urbanization has left hardly any horizontal space for outdoor gardens. Green walls   are   not   only spectacularly beautiful, but also helpful in enlivening the ambiance. Green walls can absorb heated gas in the air, lower both indoor and outdoor temperature, providing a healthier indoor air quality as well as a more beautiful space.
Types of vertical greening system:
1.Green
façade
2.Living/green
wall
i)
Modular green walls
ii)Vegetated
mat wall
Green
facades:
Green facades are a type of green wall system in which climbing
plants or cascading
groundcovers are trained to cover specially designed
supporting structures.
Plants
are either grown in the ground or in the elevated containers where they are
watered and fertilized
Green
facades are a type of green wall system in which climbing plants or cascading
groundcovers are trained to cover specially designed supporing structures.
Rooted at the base of these structure, in the ground, in intermediate planters
or even on achieving full coverage. Green facades can be anchored to existing
walls or built as freestanding structure, such as fences or columns
Green
walls / Living walls :
Living
wall system composed of pre-vegetated panels, vertical modules or planted
blankets that are fixed vertically to a structural wall or frame. These panels
can be made of plastic, expanded polystyrene, synthetic fabric and support a
great diversity of plants species ( eg: a lush mixture of ferns, ground covers,
perennials and edible plants).
Constructed from pre-vegetated panels, vertical modules or planted
blankets (vegetated mat wall) that are fixed to structural framework or to a
wall Made from steel framework, plastic, expanded polystyrene and synthetic
fabric to support a variety of diversity and density of plant species Tend to
require more maintenance such as fertilizer and water than green facade systems
that are planted into the ground
Modular green wall
:
Vertical Garden Modules is made up of recycled poly propylene
material. It has attractive look, highly durable in nature and it can be easily
installed. It provides instant solution for making garden in your residing
place.
Green wall cups:
Frame/ Supporting panel
Easily detachable cups/pots
Green
wall cup type/ Biowall cups
Vegetated mat wall
:
This system, pioneered by Patrick Blanc, is composed of two layers
of synthetic fabric with pockets filled with the plants and growing media .The fabric walls are
supported on a framework  and backed by a
waterproof membrane against the building wall Nutrients and water are
delivered through an irrigation system at the top of the wall
Building and installation of Green walls:
Green wall system vary greatly in
their design and construction from DIY projects to modular green wall systems.
This heading provides information on
Structures and
components for green wall system
Suitable Plants
Growing media
Iirrigation and plant
nutrition
General considerations
for green walls
Structures and
components for green wall system:
Front
panel
Bottom
drainage tray
Geo
textile pouch
Stabilizers
Side
panel
Hanging
hook
Front
panel
Side
panel
Stabilizers
Bottom
drainage tray
Completed module
Choosing
the plants :
The
best plants for vertical gardens are dense, compact and low growing. Make sure
you choose species that suit the aspect of the wall on which they’ll be
growing. A wall drenched in sun, for instance, will need a selection of fairly
drought-tolerant plants, whereas a shady spot – perhaps under a pergola or
verandah – will require a selection of shade lovers, such as ferns. Also bear
in mind that the bottom of the unit will hold more moisture than the top, so
consider this when you’re deciding what to plant where.
Apart from aesthetic preferences and the plants
ability to grow in a soilless, vertical location; the selection of plants is
based on several factors, for example: What is the local climate like (minimum
temperature especially important to know)? How much sun exposure is each area
of the surface receiving and how does it change during the year? Is there any
particular micro climate — such as high buildings creating strong winds along a
wall? Understanding the prevailing growing conditions is essential to make the
right decision when choosing plants.
Plants
suitable for vertical garden :
Outdoor plants
Peperomia, Syngoniums, Philodendron, Epipremnum, Begonia,
Anthuriums, Nephrolepis, Chlorophytum, Lantana, Pilea, Rheo discolor, Cuphea, Fittonia,
Spathiphylum, Schefflera
Indoor
Green walls/ For shaded areas:
Herbaceous
perennials
Pepromia, Syngoniums, Philodendron, Epipremnum, Pepromia,
Begonia, Anthuriums, Chlorophytum, Pilea, Rheo discolor, Fittonia, Spathiphylum,
Schefflera
Shrubs
Schefflera, Ficusspp
succulents
Rheo discolor, Zebrinapendula, Setcreaseapurpurea
Ferns
Nephrolepis
For
Outdoors/Exterior Green walls
:
Herbaceous
perennials
Asparagus spp., Pileamicrophylla, Alternenthera,
Mentha spp.
Succulents
Jade plant, Sedums, Portuluca
Shrubs
Dusty miller, Cuphea
Ground
covers
Baby’s tear, Callisarepens
Grass
like foliage forms
Ophiophogon, Dianellatasmanica
Growing
media:
Requirements:
Weightless media
High Water
holding capacity
High Nutrient
holding capacity
Good Porosity
Neutral pH
Cocopeat,
Perlite, Sphagnum moss, vermiculite, vermicompost, shredded bark and leaf molds
are the common media combinations used. Soil in not used since it increases the
weight of the green walls.
There
are three types of growth media used in living walls:
Loose media
Mat media
Structural media.
Loose
medium
walls tend to be "soil-on-a-shelf" or
"soil-in-a-bag" type systems. Loose medium systems have their soil
packed into a shelf or bag and then are installed onto the wall. These systems
require their media to be replaced at least once a year on exteriors and
approximately every two years on interiors. Loose soil systems are not well
suited for areas with any seismic activity. Reparations are only achieved by
re-stuffing soil into the holes on the wall, which is both difficult and messy.
Loose-soil systems should not be used in areas where there will be a lot of
public interaction as they are quite messy and lose their soil little by little
over time. Loose-soil systems with physical media erosion systems are well
suited for all green wall applications.
Mat
type systems
tend to be either coir fibre or felt mats. Mat media are quite
thin, even in multiple layers, and as such cannot support vibrant root systems
of mature plants for more than three to five years before the roots overtake
the mat and water is not able to adequately wick through the mats. The method
of reparation of these systems is to replace large sections of the system at a
time by cutting the mat out of the wall and replacing it with new mat. This
process compromises the root structures of the neighbouring plants on the wall
and often kills many surrounding plants in the reparation process.
Structural
media
are growth medium "blocks" that are not loose, nor mats, but
incorporate the best features of both into a block that can be manufactured
into various sizes, shapes and thicknesses. These media have the advantage that
they do not break down for 10 to 15 years, can be made to have a higher or
lower water holding capacity depending on the plant selection for the wall, can
have their pH and EC's customized to suit the plants, and are easily handled
for maintenance and replacements. They are the most robust option for a living
wall for both exterior applications and for interior applications. They are
also the best choice in areas where high-winds, seismic activity or heights
need to be addressed in the design. Structural media are superior to the other
media for their longevity and high-level of performance in a variety of
circumstances. Depending on the installation, they do tend to be more expensive
to install, but lower cost to maintain.
Irrigation
and plant nutrition:
Green walls cannot be sustained without irrigation.
Interruptions to the water supply are a common cause of plant failure on green
walls. Systems designed with inbuilt irrigation should mitigate plant losses
due to inconsistent moisture management, although errors can still occur.
Automated, remotely controllable irrigation systems are used for walls in high
profile locations, or in situations where access is challenging. Note that the
quality, design and costs will vary between different systems. The most
sophisticated systems enable the maintenance supervisor to keep track of the automated
performance of the system, including the volume of irrigation delivered, its
frequency, substrate moisture content, as well as pH and nutrient levels in the
water supply. The settings can be overridden if needed; for instance, the
frequency or duration of irrigation cycles may be increased on hot days. In
hydroponic systems, plant nutrition is delivered by a fertilizer injection
system that releases controlled doses of fertiliser into the irrigation system
(fertigation). Management of fertigation systems and rates of delivery requires
specialist knowledge, as it is more complex than fertilizing soil or growing
media. Hydroponic systems require continual monitoring of pH, water hardness
and total dissolved solids (TDS), and adjustment of these parameters where
necessary.
Irrigation:
The irrigation system is
designed to minimize water consumption. It consists of an automation-unit with
equipment for control of nutrient injection and irrigation cycles. When a
surface has a variation of sun exposures, the irrigation is divided into
segments in order to program it specifically for each part. Within the
multi-layered felt surface a drip-tube is integrated. Water consumption varies
with heat and sun exposure, but compared to normal green spaces or a lawn, the
consumption is normally lower.
It averages between 2-5 l/m2/day.
For hydroponic green wall systems, the fertigation system may
apply 0.5-20 litres of irrigation solution per square metre perday. Internal
green wall requirements are at the lower end of this range, and external green
walls at the higher end. Irrigation cycles typically last a few minutes and
will be required several times a day. Keeping irrigation volumes low minimises
waste and reduces run-off. Irrigation run-off may be captured in a tank at the
base of the wall and recycled back through the green wall system.  Green walls that use a high quality,
water-retentive growing medium, and are not in an exposed or particularly hot
location, may thrive on a weekly watering regime. In most simple, soil-based
systems, including DIY systems, controlled release fertiliser is mixed in with
the growing medium, rather than using a fertigation system. Irrigation must be
available as soon as the plants are installed in the wall system. The
irrigation system requires a water meter to monitor irrigation volume, and a
pressure gauge to monitor the even application of water.
The need for ongoing regular irrigation and the expectation that water will be used
sustainably means that stored (harvested or recycled) water should be used
whenever possible, so a pump is necessary.
Design /
process:
Each vertical garden is
given a unique design and selection of species. The composition of plants takes
in consideration the specific environment where it will be built, such as the
local- and micro climate, sun exposure and the surrounding context. The aim is
to create a one of a kind and site-specific garden that stands beautiful
through all the seasons of the year.
A well executed design is
also a way to minimize the future maintenance demand of the garden. A plant's
growth habit, size and behavior on a vertical surface is important knowledge
for making the right combination of species, in order to keep the competition
between plants at a healthy level. Choosing the right plant for the right place
makes sense for any garden, but maybe even more so in a vertical garden..
A
vertical garden can be installed in almost any location and as a living
material, the potential of integrating plants in our urban environments is
interesting. Places never thought of as possible could be inhabited by plants,
like subway stations or other intensely frequented places where horizontal
space is difficult to spare.
Light:
Direct sunlight can deliver
over 100.000 lux whereas the average light level in an office is around 300-500
lux. Even if the least light demanding species are used, artificial light is
normally necessary indoor. A few species will stay fine at 900 lux, but a
slightly increased level at some parts of the surface will broaden the
variation of species that can be used. An artificially illuminated surface has
shifting light levels, due to the fact that light reduces with the square of
the distance from the light source. Some areas might have 3.000 lux and others
900 lux. The plant design is made with this in mind, taking advantage of the
higher levels for more demanding and interesting species.
General
considerations:
Watering:
Appropriate time
Carefull
selection for wind prone areas (Succulent and hardy plants)
Removing
the dried leaves
Keeping
the structure clean
Disposing
the water from drainage system
Pruning
if necessary
Timely
application of fertilizers
Benefits of Vertical gardening:
Aesthetic
effects
Acts
as natural insulation for hot
and cold air and a save energy for your building
Reduces CO2 levels and increases
oxygen and improved air quality
Conserves water and watering takes
less effort
Sound
absorption and noise absorption
Improves
thermal insulation and energy efficiency
Provides
protection to buildings from adverse temperature and hence improves the life
expectancy of the buildings
Mitigate
urban island heat effect
It  holds rain water, providing food and shelter
for wildlife
DIY ( Do it Yourself) :
Target site
Water proofing
Fixing of frame
Mounting cups on the frame
Completed module
Or you can use garden
trellis/nets to hand the pots to form a low cost vertical gardens
Vertical
pillars:
Drilling the holes according to the
spacing mentioned
Filling the pipe with gravel, sand, coir
pith and water
Planting without disturbing the ball of
earth
After planting
Certain DIY ideas for you to make simple and low
cost vertical gardens in your houses
Green
walls in various locations
:
Indoor
Vertical garden
Public
Buildings/ Apartments
Malls
Universities/Airports/
Hospitals
Streetscapes/ Bridges/ flyovers
Source:
Department of Floriculture and Landscaping
TNAU,Coimbatore-3.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2021.