Stress Management :: Flood
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Stress Management
:: Drought
Mitigation of
Water Stress
The
adverse effects of water stress on crop growth can be mitigated by the
application of chemicals such as nutrients, anti-transpirants and Plant Growth
Regulators (PGRs), which induce the plants to become adaptive to water stress
situations for a specified period and the water requirement for such periods
can be minimized or saved.
1. Nutritional Management
Among
the major nutrients, potassium and magnesium are found to be highly deficient
due to water deficit conditions. Therefore, application of potassium enhances
the water uptake as well as the water relations in the plant tissues by
osmoregulation processes, by acting as a potent osmoregulator (osmolyte),
thereby the solute potential is reduced. Besides, potassium nutrition also
helps in the favourable stomatal regulatory mechanisms, which regulate the
water balance of the plants. This has also resulted in the increased WUE of the
plants. Similarly, magnesium is component of chlorophyll, its content and
uptake is drastically reduced due to the water stress effect. This is most
prominent in Mg-loving crops like cotton.
Besides
macronutrients, deficiencies of micronutrients also appear under water deficit
situations due to the following reasons:
Depletion due to erosion and leaching. In India, annual
soil loss is estimated to be about 6000 Metric tons and obviously due to loss
through run off water and soils
Continuous use of micronutrients free NPK fertilizers
in dryland agriculture and diminishing the use of organic matter, FYM, compost
and green / green leaf manures.
Use of high-yielding varieties (HYVs), adoption of
intensive systems of farming and cropping and use of heavy doses of
fertilizers, increased proportionately the mining of micronutrients from the
soil
Since increased crop production arising from the heavy
demand of the nutrients in rapid depletion of macro and micro-nutrients unless
regularly replenished. Consequently, the deficiencies of micro-nutrients in
general and that of Zn, Fe and B in particular are widely spread under stress
conditions.
Therefore,
foliar application of the following nutrients depending upon the occurrence of
their efficiencies will mitigate the water-stress induced nutritional imbalance
in crops.
2 % DAP
0.5 to 1 % potassium chloride (KCl)
0.5 % Zinc sulphate
0.5 – 1.0 % Ferrous sulphate + 1 % urea
0.3 % Boric acid
Use of Antitranspirants
In
India,
about 90% of the land is under rainfed farming; therefore, it is very essential
to manage every drop of water received through rains. Though various measures
are adopted to conserve he rain water, yet rainfed farming is often subjected
to drought. Transpiration is said to be unavoidable evil but it has several
functions to attend in the crop cycle. For producing one tone of food, the crop
plant requires varied amount of water as furnished below:
Cereals and legumes: 400 – 500
litres of water / kg of grains
Fruits and vegetable: 1000
litres / kg of food
Water transpired by crops (season / plant):
Maize                                 : 200 litres
Sunhemp                           :  27 litres
Cotton                               : 8 – 10 litres
/ day
Citrus                                :  100 – 200 litres / day
Trees (9 – 10 m height)      : 300 – 800litres / day
Forest
trees of 400 – 600 trees:  20,000 barrels
/ day (1 barrel = 500 litres)
Similarly,
the WUE of crops is also different and ranges from 0.24 to
1.75 kg / mm of water / ha. The WUE of sorghum is higher but that of cotton is
the lowest. This difference lies with the maturity period and nutritive value
of the crop. Cotton grows for six to seven months while sorghum grows for four
moths.
Drought
reduces the yield by 0 – 100% depending upon the severity. Prolonged drought
can drastically reduce the yield to zero level. But, intermittent drought for
10 – 15 days at early or late stage is common under rainfed conditions. Drought
during the critical phenological phase like flowering and grain development is
highly detrimental. However, the crop productivity is dependant on how fast a
plant can recover after a stress of 6-10 days.
The
severity of intermittent drought of 6-10 days during critical stages of the
crop can reasonably be avoided by the use of antitranspirants and thus crops
can be saved. Antitranspirants can effectively be used to the crop under water
stress with adverse rainfall.
Classification of Antitiranspirants (ATs)
and field responses
The
ATs are categorically classified on mode of action in the following four types:
I.
Materials causing stomatal closure
1. Herbicides like 2, 4 – D, Phosphon D and Atrazine
2. Fungicides like Phenyl Mercuric Acetate (PMA)
3. Metabolic inhibitors like hydroxy sulfonates,
potassium metabisulphite
etc.
4. Growth hormones like ABA, Ethrel, TIBA, succinic acid, ascorbic
acid and
Cycocel (CCC)
II.
Reflectant Types
1.
Kaoline
2.
China Clay
3.
Calcium bicarbonate
4.
Lime water
III.
Thin-forming chemicals
1.
Hexadecanol (Higher alcohols)
2.
Cetyl alcohol
3.
Methanol
4.
Paclobutrazol
5.
Brassinolide
6.
Resorcinol
IV.
Polyethylene materials forming thick films
1.
Mobileaf
2.
Folicot
3.
Waxol
4.
S- 800
5.
Hico-110R
(All
the above chemicals are trade names given by the companies)
The
purpose of ATs is to maintain the growth and productivity under stress
conditions and it is never recommended for high productivity / unit area. It
saves the crop and helps to get marginal yield when the expectations are zero.
Role of ATs
in Irrigation Water Saving
Some
of the ATs can also be used through drip (as
Fertigation
) to save the
frequency of irrigation. In this context, the crop productivity could also be
increased by 26.2, 23.6 and 15.4 % over unsprayed control with the sprays of
Hico-100 R, paclobutrazol and 8– Hydro Quinine respectively under 6 limited
irrigations as against 9 irrigations and thus considerably saved irrigation
water.
Thus, assured
benefits of ATs to the crops can be summarized as below:
Optimized yield levels under infrequent rainfall
situations
Assured better crop growth and yield when no yields are
expected using severe drought
Getting normal sized grains
Improved seed quality (so that produce can be used for
seed purpose)
Saving of crops with marginal crop productivity under
drought
Reducing irrigation especially in post-rainy long
duration crops like cotton and pigeon pea
Minimizing irrigation frequency and saving water
through drip irrigation (eg. Cetyl alcohol and / or Hexadecanol)
Monitoring crop loss with limited inputs
Monitoring / managing drought
Arresting fast receding soil moisture for better growth
and yield of rabi crops
Very useful for farmers with minimum irrigation
facilities
Saving large nurseries when water is scarce in summer
months
USE OF PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS (PGRS)
The
plants possessing moderate canopy development (moderate values for LAI), less
reduction in photosynthesis, deeper root system, higher root / shoot ratio and
delayed senescence will perform better under water stress conditions.
Toward
this, application of some of the PGRs will prove beneficial for better crop
growth and development when grown under water deficit situations. Some of the
PGRs and their effects on crops in order to suit to the water stress conditions
are:
Cycocel & Mepiquat chloride:
For
promoting root growth (for more water absorption) and suppressing leaf area
development (for reducing transpiration loss of water) and delaying on set of
leaf senescence.
Cytokinins and Salicylic acid:
They delay the
leaf senescence processes and also favour stem reserve utilization by the
developing grains especially during the water defict situations.
Brassinolides:
These PGRs
increase the photosynthetic activity of the plants
Ascorbic acid:
Ascorbic
acid acts as an anti-oxidant agent for scavenging Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)
accumulating under stress and thus avoiding membrane damage.
Pre-sowing Hardening of Seeds / Plants:
Hardening
of seeds / plants to required temperature / chemicals enables the plants to
overcome the specific stresses. This process actually hardens the protoplasm
(by osmoregulation), which enables the seeds to absorb more water under
favourable situations to maintain its viability under unfavourable conditions.
Chemicals used for seed hardening process
especially under rainfed conditions:
1. 1% KCl      2. 1% KH2PO4    3. 100 ppm Succinic
acid        4. 0.5% NaCl        5. 100 ppm ZnSO4
6. 100 MnSO4
7. 100 ppm Ascorbic acid        8. 250 ppm Cycocel               9.
0.5% MgSO4
Thus,
these chemicals / PGRs could serve as boon to the frustrated farmers of rainfed
areas, if rightly adopted with perspective vision to have food security.
Adoption of the agrotechniques is the only solution for farmers of dryland and
water stressed scenario to save millions of world population in millennium
especially in the developing countries, like India.
Agro-techniques for mitigating Water Stress
Foliar spray of 2%c DAP + 1% KCl (MOP) during critical
stages of flowering and grain formation
3% Kaoline spray at critical stages of moisture stress
Foliar spray of 500 ppm Cycocel (1 ml of commercial
product per litre of water)
Mulching with 5 tones of sorghum / sugarcane trash,
which saves 19-20% of irrigation water by reducing evaporation loss of water
Split application of N and K fertilizers as in cotton
at 45 and 60 DAS
Use of biofertilizers
viz.,
Azospirillum or phosphobacteria @ 10 packets / ha along with
25 kg of soil or FYM
Application of 12.5 kg / ha along with 37.5 kg of sand
Seed hardening with 1% KH2PO4 and
other salts for 6 – 8 hours (depending upon nature of seed coat) soaked in
equal volume of water
Spray of 40 ppm NAA (4 ml of Planofix  in 4.5 litres of water)
Seed treatment + soil application + foliar spray of Pink
Pigmented Facultative Methnaotrops (PPFM) @ 106 as a source of
cytokinins.
As in cotton, nipping terminal portion f main stem
beyond 15th (at 70 - 80 DAS) and at 20th node (at 90 DAS)
in the case of hybrids and varieties respectively for arresting transpiratory
loss of water)
Foliar spray of 0.5% zinc sulphate + 0.3 % boric acid +
0.5 % Ferrous sulphate + 1% urea during critical stages of moisture stress
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2008-2024.