ORGANIC FARMING :: Frequently Asked Questions
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
Organic Farming :: Frequently Asked Questions
Vermicompost
What
is Vermicompost?
Vermicompost refers to organic manure
produced by earthworms. It is a mixture of worm castings (faecal excretions),
organic material including humus, live earthworms, their cocoons and other
organisms. Vermicomposting is an appropriate cost effective and efficient
recycling technique for the disposal of non-toxic solid and liquid organic
wastes.
What
is Vermiculture?
Vermiculture can be defined as culture
of earthworms. Earthworms are divided into two groups: humus formers and humus
feeders. The first group dwell on the surface and feed on nearly 90% organic
materials. They are generally darker in colour, and are also called epigeic or
detritivorous earthworms. It is these worms that are generally harnessed for
vermicomposting. The second group, the humus feeders, are burrowing worms some
of which are useful in both compost preparation as well as making the soil
porous. Generally the burrowers help in mixing and distributing humus through
the soil.
It has been proved that earthworms can degrade organic wastes speedily and
efficiently. However, to increase the efficiency of vermicomposting, care
should be taken to see that worms thrive well on organic matter, breed faster
adapting to moisture and climatic fluctuations. The most beneficial feature of
vermicomposting is that it eliminates foul smell of decaying organic wastes, as
it is a fully aerobic system. The concept of vermiculture became well known in
the 50s of this century when facilities were set up in industrialised countries
of Western Europe for the mass breeding of earthworms. Subsequently, USA,
England and France conducted several experiments related to vermiculture
technology for efficient disposal of organic wastes.
How does Vermiculture work?
Earthworms feed on organic waste, consuming two to five times their body
weight. They use a relatively small amount of their intake for their growth and
excrete the mucus coated undigested matter as vermicasts. Vermicasts consist of
organic matter that has undergone physical and chemical breakdown through the
activity of the muscular gizzard that grinds the material. The nutrients
present in the vermicasts are readily soluble in water for uptake by plants.
Vermicast is a rich source of macro and micronutrients, vitamins, enzymes, antibiotics,
growth hormones and microflora.
Can
compost be made without earthworms?
Yes! But vermicompost is considered
superior to other types of compost because of its quality. Moreover earthworms
ingest litter, dung and other organic matter and grind it into fine particles,
thereby increasing the surface area and promoting faster decomposition. The
material passes through the body of the earthworm to produce vermicast. Soils
with vermicasts have roughly 100 times more bacteria than soil without worms.
Moreover plant growth promoting substances have been reported to be present in
vermicasts.
My vermicompost manufacturing unit is
plagued by a number of red ants. Are there any bio-friendly measures to tackle
the menace as I do not want to use any chemicals?
You may sprinkle red chilli powder on
all the sides of your unit to keep the ants from entering into your unit.
Where can I get information on
vermicompost and vermiwash?
You may contact
Professor and Head
Department of
Environmental Sciences
Tamil Nadu Agricultural
University
Coimbatore – 641 003
Where can I obtain earthworms for my
vermicompost unit and is there any way I can sell my produce?
You may contact Mr. R. Ranganathan,
President, Association or Organic Farmers No16-Vanigar street, Thirupporur,
Tamil Nadu-603 110, email: tedetrust@rediffmail.com, phone :044-27446369,
mobile: 94433-46369 for earthworms and for selling your produce.
The earthworms in my vermicompost unit
die frequently. What is the reason for the mortality of the worms?
Excess moisture and lack of proper
aeration can cause mortality of the worms. Provide proper drainage holes to
drain the excess water. The water thus drained can be used as a vermin wash for
plants.
My vermicompost manufacturing unit is
attacked by a number of pests. How can I control them?
You may erect a fence around the
vermicompost manufacturing unit and sprinkle or spray pest repellent around the
base of the unit to prevent the pests from attacking it.
My worms haven't eaten the waste even
though I started my worm farm weeks ago.
When first starting a new worm farm the worms need time to get used to
their new surroundings and usually start eating the original bedding material
first but then soon move up to the new food source. Add just enough waste first
until you can see worms moving around in it, then you can add more from then
onwards.
My worms are trying to escape, what am
I doing wrong.
Worms are very specific about what conditions they live in and if they don't
like them they will try to leave enmasse. If this is happening you must go back
and check on the things that may be forcing them to want to leave. These
include what you are feeding them, is the bedding material too moist, the pH
level of the bedding material, etc. These problems are usually fixed quickly
and easily and without losing too many worms.
Whilst I am away on holidays will my
worms starve to death?
No, they should be OK but try and avoid adding any fresh food material and
cover the bedding surface with moist newspaper or Hessian (gunny bags) so as to
keep the bedding material from drying out. You may also leave mud pots
containing water covered with lids, half buried into the pits/tanks. Even if
the surrounding material dries up, the earthworms may move and stay beneath
these moist pots. If you are planning to go away for an extended time (month or
more) you may want to get a friend or neighbour to take over looking after your
worms for the time you are away.
If I cut a worm in half will I have two
worms?
No, so be careful when you are turning your bedding
over so as not to cut any worms in half.
How to collect native earthworms?
Identify worm-inhabited soils marked by visible earthworm castings on the
soil surface is. Dissolve about 500gm jaggery (native sugar) and 500gm fresh
cattle dung in 20 litres of water. Sprinkle on an area1m x 1m. Cover with
straw, leave cattle dung lumps and cover with an old gunny bag. Keep watering
for about 20 to 30 days. A combination of epigeic and anecic native worms will
aggregate here that could be collected and used.
What environmental conditions do the worms like?
Paradise for a compost worm would be an environment which was pH neutral, 25ºC
air temperature, above 70% air humidity, and between 70 & 90% soil
moisture. The soil would contain coarse materials to ensure the soil is
aerated, as well as fine food particles of pre-composted organic material.
How do worms reproduce?
Composting worms are hermaphrodites, with each mature worm having a full set of
both male and female sex organs, reaching sexual maturity after 55 days.
After mating, a cocoon develops which may contain as few as three to as many as
twenty wormlings, depending on the conditions and food provided to the
worms.
What food do worms eat?
Worms prefer food that is wet, high in nutrients and relatively low in
carbon.  Ideal foods may include rotting fruit or vegetables, kitchen
waste, some animal manures, garden waste and compost, and corrugated cardboard.
Worms do not like onion, garlic,
shallots or materials with high ammonia or nitrogen levels, or large quantities
of fats and oils.
How much can a worm eat?
In theory, a worm can eat about its own body weight in food per day, depending
on the type and quality of worm food and the conditions in which the worms are
living.
Worms rely on billions of
microorganisms such as bacteria, algae, fungi, and nematodes, to soften and break
down organic material before the worm digests both the microorganisms and the
organic material.
It takes around 90 days for the organic
material to be processed by the worms and be ready for harvesting.
What is the importance of vermiculture
products?
The products of vermiculture act as environmentally friendly long-term soil
conditioners containing nutrients readily available to plants, which greatly
improve soil performance and crop yields.
Scientific research conducted into the
effects of vermicast has found 30-50% increases in nitrogen uptake, 100%
increases in potassium and phosphate uptake, increases in root length, root
numbers, and shoot length, and 40-60% increases in cucumber and tomato
yields. There are also reported increases in flavour and shelf-life,
though these findings are not as easily quantified.
Source
http://www.icrisat.org/vasat/learning_resources/OrganicFAQs/organic_farming.htm
www.mycorrhizae.com
www.hortsorb.com
http://kendujhar.nic.in/
http://www.greenpeace.org
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2009-16