Glossary :: A
Absolute Humidity
Absolute Humidity is the
absolute or actual quantity of water vapour by weight present in given volume
of air.
Acre-foot
The volume of water that would
cover one acre to a depth of one foot
.
Artificial
Insemination
Impregnating
an animal through artificial means, not through natural breeding.
Annual
Any
plant which completes its entire life cycles and dies within one year or less.
Aboricide
A chemical used for
killing trees or woody shrubs.
Acedophilies
The plants which can
grow in acidic soils (pH range 4.5-6.5).
Acid Forming Fertilizer
A term applied to
commercial fertilizers which leave an acid residue in the soil. The amount of
calcium carbonate required to neutralize the acid residue is referred as its
equivalent acidity.
Actinomycetes
A non-taxonomic term
applied to a group of organisms with characteristics intermediate between the
simple bacteria and the true fungi.
Active Ingredient
It is that part of a
chemical formulation which is directly responsible for the herbicidal effects. In
some herbicides the entire molecule is considered as the active unit. Thus, if
the chemical is 95 per cent pure it will be considered as having 95 per cent
active ingredient. In others, the herbicidal activity is more accurately
calculated on an acid equivalent basis.
Adjuvant
An additive ingredient
that facilitates or modifies the action of the principle ingredient.
Adsalt Sugarcane
Sugarcane
that takes 18 months for harvesting usually planted in July.
Agricultural Statistics
It concerns with
scientific methods for collecting, organizing, summarizing, presenting and
analyzing data generated from agricultural experiments as well drawing valid
conclusion and making reasonable decision on the basis of such analysis.
Agriculture
An activity of man,
primarily aimed at the production of food, fibre, fuel etc. by optimum use of
terrestrial resources.
Agrihorticulture
Agrihorticulture is a
form of agroforestry where fruit trees are the tree components. This system
provides for a higher income per unit area, with the additional income being
generated from fruit yield. It also serves as an option to the farmer even in
case of crop failure. Sometimes, well maintained and well established orchard
bring even higher returns than the field crops. Fruit trees also provide
protection to degraded lands. The species of fruits to be grown depend largely
on the amount of rainfall. Porous, aerated and deep soils are good for fruit
growing. These systems require high initial investment and care.
Agroclimatic Region
The grouping of
different physical areas within the country into broadly homogenous zones based
on climatic and edaphic factor.
Agroecological Zone
A major area of land
that is broadly homogenous in climatic and edaphic factors, but not necessarily
continuous, where a specific crop exhibits roughly the same biological
expression.
Agroecology
The holistic study of
agroecosystem, including all environmental agricultural crops and human
elements, their interrelationships and the process in which they are involved.
Agrometeorology
The branch of meteorology
relevant to problems of agriculture. It is concerned, in particular, with the
surface layer of the atmosphere and with condition with the variations of the
meteorological element like rainfall, humidity, temperature, sunshine, wind
velocity, atmospheric pressure etc.
Agronomy
The word has been
derived from the Greek word ‘agros’ means fields and ‘nomos’ means management.
It is a specialized branch of agriculture dealing with crop production and soil
management.
Allelopathy
Direct/indirect harmful
effect that one plant has on another or manually on each other through the
production of chemical compounds that escape into the environment.
Alley Cropping
A farming system in
which arable crops are grown in alley formed by trees or shrubs, established
mainly to hasten soil-fertility reiteration and enhance soil productivity.
Annual crops are grown in spaces between rows and trees or shrubs, often
leguminous one that tolerate heavy and regular coppicing. The leafy and woody
material of the trees and shrubs is used as mulch in the crop(s) and also often
as fodder, timber, fuel etc. Also referred to as venue cropping and hedgerow
cropping.
Allogamy
In allogamy, pollen
grains from flowers of one plant pollinate the flowers of other plants (Syn.,
cross-pollination).
Alluvial Soil
A soil developed from
recently deposited by alluviam (running water of streams and rivers) and
exhibiting essentially no horizon development or modification of the recently
deposited materials. This is the most important soil group in India, derived
from the deposition from tributaries of the Ganga, Brahmaputra and Indus.
Despite a great deal of variations, alluvial soils, coastal alluviam and
coastal sands. Geologically the alluvium is divided into khaddar or the newer
alluviam which is sandy,generally light coloured and less stony (kankari)in
composition, and bhangar or the older alluvium which is dark, more clayey and
full stones (kankar). The soils range from drift sand to loams and from fine
silts to stiff clays. Occasional pebbles are also present. The drawbacks of
these soils are- presence of impervious clays in part obstructs drainage and
promotes accumulation of injurious salts of sodium and magnesium making these
soils less fertile. Formation of hard pan at alleviation of finer soil is
sometimes observed.
Alternative drying and wetting
(rice)
Frequent draining and
reflooding (aerobic and anaerobic cycle ) in rice fields.
Aquatic weeds
Weeds are found in lakes
and ponds.