Agriculture :: Mineral Nutrition :: Introduction
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
Plant Nutrition :: Mineral Nutrition
Nutrient Deficiency Symptoms of Plants
Growing
plants act as integrators of all growth factors and are the products in which
the grower is interested. Therefore, careful inspection of the growing plant
can help identify a specific nutrient stress. if a plant is lacking in a
particular nutrient, characteristic symptoms may appear. Deficiency of a
nutrient does not directly produce symptoms. Rather, the normal plant processes
are thrown out of balance, with an accumulation of certain intermediate organic
compounds and a shortage of others. This leads to the abnormal conditions
recognized as symptoms. Visual evaluation of nutrient stress should be used
only as a supplement to other diagnostic techniques (i.e., soil and plant
analysis). Nutrient deficiency symptoms may be classified as follows:
Complete crop failure at the seedling stage.
Severe stunting of plants.
Specific leaf symptoms appearing at varying times
during the season.
Internal abnormalities such as clogged conductive
tissues.
Delayed or abnormal maturity.
Obvious yield differences, with or without leaf
symptoms.
Poor quality of crops, including differences in
protein, oil, or starch content, and storage quality.
Yield differences detected only by careful
experimental work.
Each
symptom must be related to some function of the nutrient in the plant. A given
nutrient may have several functions, which makes it difficult to explain the
physiological reason for a particular deficiency symptom. For example, when N
is deficient, the leaves of most plants become pale green or light yellow. When
the quantity of N is limiting, chlorophyll production is reduced, and the
yellow pigments, carotene and xanthophylls are shown through a number of
nutrient deficiencies produced such as pale green or yellow leaves, and the
deficiency must be further related to a particular leaf pattern or location on
the plant.
Apparent
visual deficiency symptoms can be caused by many factors other than a specific
nutrient stress. Precautions in interpreting nutrient deficiency symptoms
include the following:
The visual symptom may be caused by more than one
nutrient. For example, N-deficiency symptoms may be identified, although S may
also be deficient and its symptoms may not be readily apparent. B deficiency is
accompanied by a red coloration of the leaves near the growing point when the
plant is well supplied with K. on the other hand, when the K content is low,
yellowing of alfalfa leaves occurs.
Deficiencies are actually relative, and a deficiency of
one nutrient may be related to an excessive quantity of another. For example,
Mn deficiency may be induced by adding large quantities of Fe, provided that
soil Mn is marginally deficient. Also, at a low level of P supply, the plant
may not require as much N compared to normal or adequate P. In other words,
once the first limiting factor is eliminated, the second limiting factor will
appear (Liebig’s law of the minimum).
It is often difficult to distinguish among the
deficiency symptoms in the field, as disease or insect damage can resemble
certain micronutrients deficiencies. For example, leaf hopper damage can be
confused with deficiency in alfalfa.
A visual symptom
may be caused by more than one factor. For example, sugars in corn combine with
flavones to form anthocyanins (purple, red, and yellow pigments) and their
accumulation may be caused by an insufficient supply of P, low soil
temperature, insect damage to the roots, or N deficiency.
Nutrient
deficiency symptoms appear only after the nutrient supply is so low that the
plants can no longer function properly. In such cases, it would have been
profitable to have applied fertilizer long before the symptoms appeared. If the
symptoms are observed early, it might be corrected during the growing season.
Since the objective is to get the limiting nutrient into the plant as quickly
as possible, with some nutrients and under some conditions this may be
accomplished with foliar applications or side dressings. Usually the yield is
reduced below the quantity that would have been obtained if adequate nutrients
had been available at the beginning. However, if the problem is properly
diagnosed, the deficiency can be corrected the following year.
Hidden
Hunger
Hidden
hunger
refers to a situation in which a crop needs more of a given nutrient
yet has shown no deficiency symptoms. The nutrient content is above the
deficiency symptom zone but still considerably needed for optimum crop
production. With most nutrients on most crops, significant responses can be
obtained even though no recognizable symptoms have appeared.
Figure. Hidden hunger is a
term used to describe a plant that shows no obvious symptoms, yet the
nutrient content is not sufficient to give the top profitable yield.
Courtesy:
The Potash Phasphate Institute, Atlanta,
Ga.
The question, then, is how best to eliminate
hidden hunger. Testing of plants and soils is helpful for planning or modifying
plant-nutrient programs to avoid this problem in subsequent crops. In both
approaches, careful consideration must be given to past management practices.
Generalized Visual Leaf and Plant Nutrient Element
Deficiency and Excess Symptoms
Element/status
Visual symptoms
Nitrogen (N)
Deficiency
Light green leaf and
plant color with the older leaves turning yellow, leaves that will eventually
turn brown and die. Plant growth is slow, plants will be stunted, and will
mature early.
Excess
Plants will be dark
green in color and new growth will be succu­lent; susceptible if subjected to
disease and insect infestation; and subjected to drought stress, plants will
easily lodge. Blos­som abortion and lack of fruit set will occur.
Ammonium toxicity
Plants fertilized with
ammonium-nitrogen (NH4- N) may exhibit
ammonium-toxicity symptoms, with carbohydrate depletion and reduced plant
growth. Lesions may occur on plant stems, there may be a downward cupping of
the leaves, and a decay of the conductive tissue at the base of the stem with
wilting of the plants under moisture stress. Blossom-end rot of fruit will
occur and Mg deficiency symptoms may also occur.
Phosphorus (P)
Deficiency
Plant growth will be
slow and stunted, and the older leaves will have a purple coloration,
particularly on the underside.
Excess
Phosphorus excess will
not have a direct effect on the plant but may show visual deficiencies of Zn,
Fe, and Mn. High P may also interfere with the normal Ca nutrition, with
typical Ca deficiency symptoms occurring.
Potassium (K)
Deficiency
On the older leaves, the
edges will look burned, a symptom known as scorch. Plants will easily lodge
and be sensitive to disease infestation. Fruit and seed production will be
impaired and of poor quality.
Excess
Plants will exhibit
typical Mg, and possibly Ca deficiency symp­toms due to a cation imbalance
Calcium (Ca)
Deficiency
The growing tips of
roots and leaves will turn brown and die. The edges of the leaves will look
ragged as the edges of emerging leaves stick together. Fruit quality will be
affected with the occur­rence of blossom-end rot on fruits.
Excess
Plants may exhibit
typical Mg deficiency symptoms, and when in high excess, K deficiency may
also occur.
Magnesium (Mg)
Deficiency
Older leaves will be
yellow in color with interveinal chlorosis (yellowing between the veins)
symptoms. Plant growth will be slow and some plants may be easily infested by
disease.
Excess
Results in a cation imbalance showing signs of
either a Ca or K deficiency.
Sulfur (S)
Deficiency
A general overall light
green color of the entire plant with the older leaves being light green to
yellow in color as the deficiency intensifies.
Excess
A premature senescence
of leaves may occur.
Boron (B)
Deficiency
Abnormal development of
the growing points (meristematic tis­sue) with the apical growing points
eventually becoming stunted and dying. Rowers and fruits will abort. For some
grain and fruit crops, yield and quality is significantly reduced.
Excess
Leaf tips and margins
will turn brown and die.
Chlorine (Cl)
Deficiency
Younger leaves will be
chlorotic and plants will easily wilt. For wheat, a plant disease will infest
the plant when Cl is deficient.
Excess
Premature yellowing of
the lower leaves with burning of the leaf margins and tips. Leaf abscission
will occur and plants will easily wilt.
Copper (Cu)
Deficiency
Plant growth will be
slow and plants stunted with distortion of the young leaves and death of the
growing point.
Excess
An Fe deficiency may be
induced with very slow growth. Roots may be stunted.
Iron (Fe)
Deficiency
Interveinal chlorosis will
occur on the emerging and young leaves with eventual bleaching of the new
growth. When severe, the entire plant may be light green in color.
Excess
A bronzing of leaves
with tiny brown spots on the leaves, a typical symptom frequently occurring
with rice.
Manganese (Mn)
Deficiency
Interveinal chlorosis of
young leaves while the leaves and plants remain generally green in color.
When severe, the plants will be stunted.
Excess
Older leaves will show
brown spots surrounded by a chlorotic zone and circle.
Molybdenum (Mo)
Deficiency
Symptoms will frequently
appear similar to N deficiency. Older and middle leaves become chlorotic
first, and In some instances, leaf margins are rolled and growth and flower
formation are restricted.
Excess
Not of common
occurrence.
Zinc (Zn)
Deficiency
Upper leaves will show
interveinal chlorosis with an eventual whiting of the affected leaves. Leaves
may be small and dis­torted with a rosette form.
Excess
An Fe deficiency will
develop.
Terms
:
Chlorosis
is
a physiological disorder that occurs to deficiency of mineral elements     (eg; Mn, K, Zn, Fe, Mg, S and N). Leaves
or plant parts become abnormally yellow.
Mottled
is
surface marked with coloured spots (anthocyanin develops) eg. Due to deficiency
of N, Mg, P, S.
Necrosis
refers to patch of dead tissues, due to the deficiency of Mg,K, Zn, Ca and Mo.
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2016.