Horticulture :: Medicinal Crops :: Tulsi
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Medicinal Crops ::Tulsi
TULSI
(Ocimum Sanctum L.)
Ocimum
sanctum is native to India, where it enjoys a religious attachment and liked to
be grown in shrines and homes as an aromatic perennial shrub. Tulsi is part of
routine worship and has scientific background as the plants possess
antimicrobial and antiviral properties and purifies the air. It is also grown
as  temperate climates, the natural
habitat of tulsi varies from sea level to an altitude of 2000 m. It grows
naturally in moist soil all over the globe.
This plant is also grown as a pot
herb and in home gardens. Tulsi is cultivated in semi urban areas and the fresh
herbage is sold to the temples and worship centres. The major source of tulsi
is from wild habitat including uncultivated field and roadside. Large volumes
of herbage is collected during seasons and traded throughout the country.
However, commercial production has significance due to valuable aroma chemicals
extracted from the essential oil of tulsi.
Chemistry:
Tulsi leaves contain a bright yellow
volatile oil which is useful against insects and bacterial. The principle
constituents of this oil are eugenol, eugenol methyl ether and carvacrol. The
oil is reported to possess anti-bacterial properties and acts as an
insecticide. It inhibits the in vitro growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
Micrococcus pyogenes var. aureus.
Leaf
Uses:
Thulsi ia an aromatic medicinal
plant is often taken in combination with other herbs. The fragrant leaves and
flowers, in the form of tincture, tea or decoction are considered to be
stomachic and expectorant, used in treating coughs, bronchitis, skin diseases,
and diarrhea. These preparations are considered to be prophylactic against
epidemics including cholera, influenza and malaria. The tulsi seeds, taken
mixed in water, juice or cow’s milk, are antioxidant, nourishing, mucilaginous
and demulcent.
They are used in treating low energy, ulcers, vomiting and
diarrhea or as an overall tonic. The powder of the dried root, taken in milk,
ghee or as a decoction, is recommended to treat malarial fever as an analgesic
application to the bites and string of insects and also to increase sexual
stamina and prevent premature ejaculation. The herb improves resistance to
stress and has a normalizing influence on blood pressure and blood sugar
imbalances. Tulsi is likely to prove prophylactic against the negative effects
of environmental toxins, including cancer. The plant is also richly endowed
with bioavailabel antioxidants, vitamins A and C and calcium. It has marked
insecticidal activity against mosquitoes.
Types:
Green
type (Sri Tulsi) and
Purple
type (Krishna Tulsi)
Soil
and climate:
The plant is sufficiently hardy and
it can be grown on any type of soil except the ones with highly saline,
alkaline or water logged conditions. However, sandy loam soil with good organic
matter is considered ideal. The crop has a wide adaptability and can be grown
successfully in tropical and sub-tropical climates. Long days with high
temperature have been found favorable for plant growth and oil production.
Propagation
The crop can be propagated through
seeds. For propagating through seeds, they are to be sown in the nursery beds.
For sowing of one hectare about 300g of seeds are required. The nursery should
be located preferably in partial shade with adequate irrigation facilities.
Soil is worked upto a depth of about 30 cm. well rotten farm yard manure is
applied to the soil and prepared to a fine tilth and seed beds of 4.5x1.0x0.2 m
size are prepared. As the seeds are minute, the required quantity of seeds are
mixed with sand in the ratio of 1:4 and sown in nursery bed, 2 months in
advance of the onset of monsoon. They germinate in 8-12 days and seedlings are
ready for transplanting in about 6 weeks time at 4-5 leaf stage.
Vegetative
propagation:
Tulsi
can also be propagated by vegetative method using terminal cuttings with about
90-100 per cent success when planted during October-December months. For this
purpose, cuttings with 8-10 nodes and 10-15 cm length are used. They are so
prepared that except for the first 2-3 pair of leaves the rest are trimmed off.
Later, they are planted in the well prepared nursery beds or polythene bags. In
about 4-6 weeks time the rooting is complete and they are ready for
transplanting into the main field. The plants are transplanted at a spacing of
40 cm between the row.
Manures
and fertilizers:
The plant requires about 15t/ha of
FYM which is to be applied as basal dose at the time of land preparation.
Regarding the inorganic fertilizers application of 120:60:60 kg/ha of NPK is
recommended.
Irrigation:
Irrigation is provided twice a week
till one month so that the plants establish themselves well. Later, it is given
at weekly interval depending upon the rainfall and soil moisture status.
Interculture:
Interspaces
should be maintained weed free and the first weeding is done one month after planting
and the second after another 30 days. Afterwards, no further weeding is
required as the plants become bushy and cover the soil and thereby smother the
weeds. However, after each harvest, weeding should be done so as to avoid weed
growth in the interspaces, if any.
Plant
protection:
Tulsi is not prone to serious
pest/disease except some minor pests like leaf rollers which can be controlled
by spraying with 0.2% Malathion or 0.1% Methyl parathion whenever noticed.
Medicinal plants like tulsi require
production involving minimal or no usage of chemical pesticides. Organic
practices include control measures using neem based formulations. Fish oil
resin soap can be used to manage such sucking pests. Botanicals viz., extracts
of garlic, Vitex negundo, Lantana camera, Clerodendron inerme, Calotropis
gigantean are often combined and sprayed periodically for controlling the
pests.
Diseases like powdery mildew can be
controlled by spraying with 0.3% wettable sulphur. Likewise seedling blight and
root rot can be controlled by drenching the nursery beds with a 0.1 per cent
solution of mercurial fungicide and adopting phytosanitory measures.
Harvesting
and yield:
The first harvest is done after 90
days of planting and subsequently it may be harvested at every 75 days
interval. The crop is harvested at full bloom stage by cutting the plants at 15
cm from ground level to ensure good regeneration for further harvests. The
yield and oil content is more in plants harvested during bring sunny days.
On an average, tulsi gives about
10,000 kgs of fresh herbage per hectare per year. The herb contains about 0.1
to 0.23 per cent oil and it about 10-20 kg of essential oil per hectare.
Irrigated tulsi gives higher herbage yield (upto 20 ton and oil yield (upto
40kg/ha).
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© TNAU 2008-2024 All Rights Reserved.