ORGANIC FARMING :: Principles in Organic Farming
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
Organic Farming :: Organic
Farming Practices
Principles of Organic Farming
The four principles of organic agriculture are as follows:
Principle of health
Organic Agriculture should sustain
and enhance the health of soil, plant, animal, human and planet as one and
indivisible.
This principle points out that the
health of individuals and communities cannot be separated from the health of
ecosystems - healthy soils produce healthy crops that foster the health of
animals and people.
Health is the wholeness and
integrity of living systems. It is not simply the absence of illness, but the
maintenance of physical, mental, social and ecological well-being. Immunity,
resilience and regeneration are key characteristics of health.
The role of organic agriculture,
whether in farming, processing, distribution, or consumption, is to sustain and
enhance the health of ecosystems and organisms from the smallest in the soil to
human beings. In particular, organic agriculture is intended to produce high
quality, nutritious food that contributes to preventive health care and
well-being. In view of this it should avoid the use of fertilizers, pesticides,
animal drugs and food additives that may have adverse health effects.
Principle of ecology
Organic Agriculture should be based
on living ecological systems and cycles, work with them, emulate them and help
sustain them.
This principle roots organic agriculture within living ecological
systems. It states that production is to be based on ecological processes, and
recycling. Nourishment and well-being are achieved through the ecology of the
specific production environment. For example, in the case of crops this is the
living soil; for animals it is the farm ecosystem; for fish and marine
organisms, the aquatic environment.
Organic farming, pastoral and wild
harvest systems should fit the cycles and ecological balances in nature. These
cycles are universal but their operation is site-specific. Organic management
must be adapted to local conditions, ecology, culture and scale. Inputs should
be reduced by reuse, recycling and efficient management of materials and energy
in order to maintain and improve environmental quality and conserve resources.
Organic agriculture should attain
ecological balance through the design of farming systems, establishment of
habitats and maintenance of genetic and agricultural diversity. Those who
produce, process, trade, or consume organic products should protect and benefit
the common environment including landscapes, climate, habitats, biodiversity,
air and water.
Principle of fairness
Organic Agriculture should build on
relationships that ensure fairness with regard to the common environment and
life opportunities.
Fairness is characterized by
equity, respect, justice and stewardship of the shared world, both among people
and in their relations to other living beings.
This principle emphasizes that
those involved in organic agriculture should conduct human relationships in a
manner that ensures fairness at all levels and to all parties - farmers,
workers, processors, distributors, traders and consumers. Organic agriculture
should provide everyone involved with a good quality of life, and contribute to
food sovereignty and reduction of poverty. It aims to produce a sufficient
supply of good quality food and other products.
This principle insists that animals
should be provided with the conditions and opportunities of life that accord
with their physiology, natural behavior and well-being.
Natural and environmental resources
that are used for production and consumption should be managed in a way that is
socially and ecologically just and should be held in trust for future
generations. Fairness requires systems of production, distribution and trade
that are open and equitable and account for real environmental and social
costs.
Principle of care
Organic Agriculture should be
managed in a precautionary and responsible manner to protect the health and
well-being of current and future generations and the environment.
Organic agriculture is a living and
dynamic system that responds to internal and external demands and conditions.
Practitioners of organic agriculture can enhance efficiency and increase
productivity, but this should not be at the risk of jeopardizing health and
well-being. Consequently, new technologies need to be assessed and existing
methods reviewed. Given the incomplete understanding of ecosystems and
agriculture, care must be taken.
This principle states that
precaution and responsibility are the key concerns in management, development
and technology choices in organic agriculture. Science is necessary to ensure
that organic agriculture is healthy, safe and ecologically sound. However,
scientific knowledge alone is not sufficient. Practical experience, accumulated
wisdom and traditional and indigenous knowledge offer valid solutions, tested
by time. Organic agriculture should prevent significant risks by adopting
appropriate technologies and rejecting unpredictable ones, such as genetic
engineering. Decisions should reflect the values and needs of all who might be
affected, through transparent and participatory processes.
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2016