TNAU Agritech Portal :: Crop Improvement
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Farmers' Innovation
|
Publications
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
Crop Improvement :: About Plant Breeding
Plant breeding
is the art and science of changing the genetics of plants for the benefit of humankind. Plant breeding can be accomplished through many different techniques ranging from simply selecting plants with desirable characteristics for propagation, to more complex molecular techniques Plant breeding has been practiced for thousands of years, since near the beginning of human civilization. It is now practiced worldwide by individuals such as gardeners and farmers, or by professional plant breeders employed by organizations such as
government
institutions, universities, crop-specific industry associations or research centers.
International development agencies believe that breeding new crops is important for ensuring
food security
by developing new varieties that are higher-yielding, resistant to pests and diseases, drought-resistant or regionally adapted to different environments and growing conditions.
Contents
1. Domestication
2. Classical plant breeding
3. Modern plant breeding
4. Genetic modification
1. Domestication
This map shows the sites of domestication for a number of crops. Places where crops were initially domesticated are called centers of origin
Plant breeding in certain situations may lead the
domestication
of wild plants.
Domestication
of plants is an
artificial selection
process conducted by
humans
to produce plants that have more desirable traits than wild plants, and which renders them dependent on artificial (usually enhanced) environments for their continued existence. The practice is estimated to date back 9,000-11,000 years. Many crops in present day cultivation are the result of domestication in ancient times, about 5,000 years ago in the
Old World
and 3,000 years ago in the
New World
. In the
Neolithic
period, domestication took a minimum of 1,000 years and a maximum of 7,000 years. Today, all of our principal
food
crops come from domesticated varieties.
A plant whose origin or selection is due primarily to intentional human activity is called a
cultigen
, and a cultivated crop
species
that has evolved from
wild
populations due to selective pressures from traditional
farmers
is called a
landrace
. Landraces, which can be the result of natural forces or domestication, are plants (or
animals
) that are ideally suited to a particular region or environment. An example are the landraces of
rice
,
Oryza sativa
subspecies
indica
, which was developed in
South Asia
, and
Oryza sativa
subspecies
japonica
, which was developed in
China
.
Classical plant breeding
Classical plant breeding uses deliberate interbreeding (
crossing
) of closely or distantly related individuals to produce new crop varieties or lines with desirable properties. Plants are crossbred to introduce
traits
/
genes
from one variety or line into a new genetic background. Progeny from the cross would then be crossed with the high-yielding parent to ensure that the progeny were most like the high-yielding parent, (
backcrossing
). The progeny from that cross would then be tested for yield and mildew resistance and high-yielding resistant plants would be further developed. Plants may also be crossed with themselves to produce
inbred
varieties for breeding.
Classical breeding relies largely on
homologous recombination
between chromosomes to generate
genetic diversity
. The classical plant breeder may also makes use of a number of
in vitro
techniques such as protoplast fusion, embryo rescue or mutagenesis to generate diversity and produce hybrid plants that would not exist in
nature
.
Traits that breeders have tried to incorporate into crop plants in the last 100 years include:
Increased
quality
and
yield
of the crop
Increased
tolerance
of environmental pressures (
salinity
, extreme
temperature
,
drought
)
Resistance to
viruses
,
fungi
and
bacteria
Increased tolerance to
insect
pests
Increased tolerance of
herbicides
Modern plant breeding
Modern plant breeding uses techniques of molecular biology to select, or in the case of genetic modification, to insert, desirable traits into plants.
Modern facilities in molecular biology has converted classical plant breeding to molecular plant breed
Steps of Plant Breeding
Major activities of plant breeding are following;
Creation - variation
Selection
Evaluation
Release
Multiplication
Distribution of the new variet
Marker assisted selection
Marker assisted selection
or
marker aided selection
(MAS)
is a process whereby a marker (morphological, biochemical or one based on DNA/RNA variation) is used for indirect
selection
of a genetic determinant or determinants of a trait of interest (i.e. productivity, disease resistance, abiotic stress tolerance, and/or quality). This process is used in
plant
and animal breeding.
Genetic modification
Genetic modification of plants is achieved by adding a specific gene or genes to a plant, or by knocking out a gene with RNAi, to produce a desirable
phenotype
. The plants resulting from adding a gene are often referred to as transgenic plants. Genetic modification can produce a plant with the desired trait or traits faster than classical breeding because the majority of the plant's genome is not altered.
The majority of commercially released transgenic plants, are currently limited to plants that have introduced resistance to
insect
pests
and herbicides. Insect resistance is achieved through incorporation of a gene from
Bacillus thuringiensis
(
Bt
) that encodes a
protein
that is toxic to some insects. For example, the
cotton bollworm
, a common cotton pest, feeds on Bt cotton it will ingest the toxin and die. Herbicides usually work by binding to certain plant enzymes and inhibiting their action. The enzymes that the herbicide inhibits are known as the herbicides
target site
. Herbicide resistance can be engineered into crops by expressing a version of
target site
protein that is not inhibited by the herbicide. This is the method used to produce glyphosate resistant crop plants Genetic modification of plants that can produce pharmaceuticals (and industrial chemicals), sometimes called
pharmacrops
, is a rather radical new area of plant breeding.
Source: "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plant_breeding"
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Publications
|
Site Map
|
Disclaimer
|
Contact Us
© 2008-2024 TNAU. All Rights Reserved.