TNAU Agritech Portal :: About Us
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Farmers' Innovation
|
Publications
|
Contact
TNAU Agritech Portal :: About Us
Tamil Nadu Agriculture University
The milestones of growth and development of TNAU in transforming lives of  Farmers
Agricultural College & Research Institute
1868
Agricultural    School was started at Saidapet, Chennai (Madras)
1906
The    Saidapet Agricultural School was shifted to Coimbatore and foundation stone    laid for Madras Agricultural College.
1908
Students    were admitted to education program leading to Licentiate in Agriculture (L.    Ag.)
1909
Opening    of Agricultural College and Research Institute (AC & RI) by Sir Arthur    Lawley.
1920
The    AC & RI was affiliated to Madras University. A new course of study    leading to a three year degree in Agriculture -B.Sc. (Ag.) was started.
1945
Second    Agricultural College was started at Bapatla (Now in Andhra Pradesh).
1958
Regional    Post Graduate Center was established to offer programs leading to Masters    degree in Agriculture & Horticulture.
1960
Integrated    system with four year B.Sc. (Ag) degree program after Pre-University    education was introduced and subsequently doctoral program in Agriculture was    started.
1965
Third    Agricultural College was started at Madurai, Tamil Nadu and the Masters    program at Madurai was introduced during 1969.
1971
The    Tamil Nadu Agricultural University came into existence with Coimbatore as its    Head Quarters.
1972
A    separate Faculty of Horticulture was established and a degree program in    Horticulture - B.Sc. (Hort.) was introduced. The College of Agricultural    Engineering was established at Coimbatore and a Bachelor's degree program in    Agricultural Engineering - B.E.(Ag) was introduced.
1973
Doctoral    program was introduced in Horticultural College and Research Institute,    Coimbatore.
1975
Faculty    of Post Graduate Education was established in TNAU, Coimbatore and Masters    and Doctoral (1978) programs were started in Environmental Sciences and    Biotechnology.
1976
The    Madras Veterinary College became constituent unit of TNAU and B.V.Sc. degree    program was suitably restructured*.
1977
Bachelor's    degree (B.F.Sc.) program in Fisheries Science at Thoothukudi was started*.
Masters    and Doctoral program in Agricultural Engineering was introduced.
1980
Bachelor's    degree (B.Sc. (H.Sc.)) in Home Science was launched in Madurai Campus.
1981
Masters    program was introduced in Home Science College & Research Institute,    Madurai and Doctoral program in 1988.
1989
Doctoral    program in Agriculture was introduced in Agricultural college & Research    Institute, Madurai; Masters program introduced in Forest College &    Research Institute, Mettupalayam and Horticultural College & Research    Institute, Periyakulam.
1990
Masters    program in Agriculture was introduced in Agricultural College & Research    Institute, Killikulam, Thoothukudi district, Tamil Nadu and Doctoral program    in Forest College & Research Institute, Mettupalayam.
1998
B.Tech.(Food Process Engineering) introduced as    self supporting program.
2002
B.Tech.(Horticulture) and B.Tech(Agricultue    Biotechnology) introduced as self supporting programs.
2004
B.Tech.(Energy and Environmental Engineering)    introduced as a self supporting program.
2005
Centenary celebrations of AC&RI, Coimbatore
2006
B.Tech.(Bioinformatics) introduced as a self supporting program.
2008
Dual Degree Masters Program with Cornell University, Ithaca, USA introduced. Dual degree option with Dalhousie University, Canada established for undergraduate program in B.Tech.(Environmental Landscape Horticulture)
2011
B.Sc.(Sericulture) introduced. M.Tech. (Ag.) in Nanotechnology introduced and M.Tech. in Environmental Engineering introduced.
2012
Masters program introduced in Plant Genetic Resource and Remote Sensing.
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Publications
|
Disclaimer
|
Contact Us