Horticulture :: FAQs_Floriculture and Landscaping
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: FAQs :: Floriculture and Landscaping
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS – FLORICULTURE  AND LANDSCAPING
FLORICULTURE
1. How can I control  white ant infestation in roses?
Lindane 1.3% 20g per pit is added to  prevent attack by white ants.
2. What is the best time  for pruning rose?
The best time of pruning is the period  when the activity of rose plant is atleast and the plant is dormant to near  dormant stage. Pruning time will depend on climatic conditions of the particular  region. Cutting back the  vigorous past  season shoots to half the length. All the weak, diseased, criss-crossing and  unproductive shoots are removed. The cut ends should be protected with Bordeaux or Copper  oxychloride + Carboryl 50 WP.
3. When will the flowers  initiate after pruning in rose?
The flowering will commence 45 days  after pruning.
4. When the hybrid roses  should be pruned?
The pruning should be done during  March and October.
5. At what height, the  malligai plants should be pruned?
The bushes should be pruned to 50 cm  height from the ground level during last week of November.
6. Why do the malligai  leaves become yellow and how to rectify this?
It is caused by three factors viz.,  iron deficiency, nematode infection and root rot disease. i) Iron deficiency:  Spray Ferrous sulphates 5 g/l at monthly intervals until the chlorotic symptoms  disappear. ii) Nematode: Test the soil for nematode infection. Apply 10 g of  Phorate granules near root zone and irrigate. iii) Root rot: Drench the soil  around the plant with Copper oxychloride at 2.5 g/lit.
7. What is the  fertilizer requirement of mullai?
120 : 240 : 120 g NPK/plant is applied  in six split doses at bimonthly intervals, the first dose being given  immediately after pruning.
8. At which time mullai  plants must be pruned?
The bushes are pruned to 45 cm height  from ground level during the last week of January.
9. When do the pitch  plants should be pruned?
Pruning is done during the last week  of December o 45 cm height from ground level.
10. What should be done  to get higher yield in crossandra?
Spray ascorbic acid 1000 ppm for high  yield (ig/lit of water).
11. How to control  nematode problem in crossandra?
Avoid planting crossandra in nematode  infested fields. To control nematodes application of phorate or carbofuran 3 G  at 1 kg a.i./ha a week after planting and to be repeated six months after  application with any one of the above chemicals at 3 and 9 gm respectively per  metre length.
12. In my crossandra  field, some plants are found dry and got easily uprooted on pulling. What is  the problem and hoe to control this?
It is due to the wilt infection. To  control this, drench the soil around the plants with Methoxyethyl mercury  chloride (Emisan) at 2 g/lit or carbendazim 0.5 ml/lit to manage this problem.
13. How to manage wilt  in chrysanthemum?
Before planting, dip the roots of the  suckers in carbendazim 1 gm in 1 lit to protect against wilt.
14. What should be done  to get more branches in chrysanthemum?
Pinching should be done once in 4  weeks after planting to induce more branching in chrysanthemum.
15. What is the duration  and yield of ratoon crop in chrysanthemum?
The ratoon crop duration is 4 months  from which we can get 10 t/ha yield.
16. How to improve the  seedling vigour in marigold?
For good quality seedlings, the seeds  must be treated with
Azospirillum
(200  g in 50 ml of rice gruel).
17. Explain the  propagation and planting techniques in tuberose?
Corms (25 to 30g) are planted  (1,12,000 cors/ha) on the sides of ridges at 45 x 20 cm spacing at 2.5 cm depth  during June – July. Corms are planted after 30 days of harvest. Dip the corms  in 5000 ppm CCC (5g/lit) before planting to increase the yield.
18. Does the nerium  plant require any inorganic nutrient application?
Application of 10 t FYM/ha during  January and again in August is sufficient for nerium. No chemical fertilizers  are normally applied.
19. Is there any variety  released in marikolundu?
No, only the local variety is being  used for cultivation.
20. Which plant part is  used as planting material in maruvu?
Cuttings from the previous crop are  used as planting material.
21. How to prepare  planting material in carnation?
5 to 10 cm terminal cuttings are  treated with NAA at 500 ppm for 5 minutes. Cuttings are then dipped in  Carbendazim 2 g/lit solution and planted in raised beds.
22. What is the ideal  growing condition for carnation?
Day temperature          –         20 – 25°C
Night temperature       –          10  -15°C
Critical photoperiod     –          13  hours
RH                            –          50-60%
23.
How  to control pest and diseases in carnation?
Red spider mite
:
Plant varieties having straight and    flat leaves. Spray dicofol 18.5 EC @ 2ml/lit or wettable sulphur 50 WP 3g/lit
Thrips
:
Spray dimethoate 30 EC 1 ml/lit or    malathion 50 EC 2 ml/lit or fenitrothion 50 EC ml/lit
Nematode
:
Carbofuran 7-8 kg/ha is applied at    the time of planting
Leaf spot
:
Spray Carbendazim or Mancozeb 2    g/lit
Blight, wilt, root rot
:
Spray Mancozeb @ 2.5g/lit
24. How to improve the  vase life of carnation?
Citric acid is added to water to make  the pH 4.5 to 5 and 5 mg of Sodium hypochloride is added to 1 litre of water.  Cut flower stalk is soaked in this solution for 4-5 hrs to improve vase life.
25. How to control  nematode and fungal disease in gladiolus?
The corms are dipped in hot water at  40 - 45°C + fungicide (captan or thiram 2g/lit) to control nematode and fungal  disease
26. What is the correct  stage of gladiolus spikes for harvest?
The flower spikes are harvested when  the first bud shows the colour of the variety.
27. What should be done  to improve the vase life of gerbera?
When flowers completely open  harvesting is done and the flower stalk is soaked in sodium hypochloride  solution (5-7ml/lit of water) for 4-5 hours to improve vase life.
28. How much yield can  we get from a hectare of goldenrod plants?
The plant yields about 3 lakh  stems/crop/ha.
29. What is the seed  rate for aster?
The seed rate required for aster is  10-12kg/ha.
30. I am having 0.5 acre  jathimalli plants under flowering stage. Will it be possible to use the flowers  for perfume production?
Among the three species of jasmine,  jathimalli (
Jasminum grandiflorum
) is  found suitable for perfume extraction. The foreign perfumery houses have a  preference for the concrete and absolute prepared from the flowers of this  variety compared to the products prepared from the flowers of the other  varieties.
31. How much concrete  can we get from a hectare of jathimalli plantations?
From a hectare, we can get 29 kg/ha of  jasmine concrete
32. I am interested in  growing anthurium plants. What is the ideal growing media?
The ideal growing media for anthurium  is leaf mould + cocopeat (1:1) mixture.
33. In my anthurium  plants, many old leaves are found? What can we do?
The old leaves must be removed leaving  3-5 healthy leaves/plant to induce new growth.
34. What is the ideal  harvesting stage of anthurium flowers?
The flowers must be harvested when the  spathes are fully openend and spadix shows about 1/3 female phase maturity  (7-10 days after spathe opening)
35. I came to know that  orchid is propagated by keikis. What is keikis?
It is nothing but the off-shoot  developing from the base of the stem.   For propagation, the keikis is separated from the mother plant and  planted in a separate pot.
36. Can we harvest the  orchid spikes when the flowers are in bud stage?
No, the spikes must be harvested only  after the flower bloom. The ideal stage for marketing is when the last one or  two buds are yet to open or at the nearest about 20 per cent of flowers are in  bud condition in the spike.
LANDSCAPING
37.  I have planned to establish a garden in two  cent land infront of my home. How to initiate the gardening and what are the  things should considered before the initiation?
Initially, a paper plan should be made  considering the taste and judgement of the owner, position of the house, size  of the house, the extent of ground, availability of water, topography of the  land, patio for outdoor living, space for drying clothes, place of pet etc. the  total area can be divided into three functional units i.e. approach or public  area, service area and private garden area and then execute the plan carefully  and systematically.
38. I want to establish  a home garden. But I have only limited space on the ground. Is it possible to  establish a garden?
Yes, you can establish a terrace  garden. This type of gardening is the only solution for the houses having  limited spaces on the ground. Before laying a roof garden, the drainage aspect  of the roof and the load which the roof can withstand are to be considered.
39. What is the cheapest  and easiest method of lawn making?
Establishing lawn by dibbling the  roots is the cheapest but slowest method of lawn making. In this method, small  roots should be dibbled about 15 cm apart into the prepared ground when it is  wet after rain. The roots spread and grow underground in the course of six  months, making a fairly compact lawn by frequent mowing, rolling and watering.
40. I am having only  limited water source. What kind of grass can I employ for my lawn?
Bermuda grass commonly called as  Hariali is very commonly used for planting lawn due to its fast growth,  hardiness, less water requirement and response to frequent mowing.
41. How to cut the  overgrown grasses in the lawn?
The grasses must be cut to uniform  height with the use of mower. But the newly planted lawn should not be mowed  till it has established well and formed a green sword. In the beginning, the  grass should be trimmed with the help of scythe. Interval of mowing of an  established lawn depends upon season. The height of lawn can be maintained by  adjusting the height of shears of lawn mower but it should not be more than  5-6cm.
42. I own a beautiful  lawn, but seem to be monotonous. Can I plant few shrubs inside the lawn?
A spatious lawn through beautiful will  often be monotonous. But planting many shrubs or trees in the lawn will become  unlikely. So, to break the monotony, beautiful tree of shrub is recommended as  single specimen in the lawn. The trees
like Amherstia nobilis, Callistemon  lanceolatus, Thuja orientalis, Araucaria excelsa
and shrubs like
Agave Americana, Furcraea  gigantean, Bougainvillea spectabilis, Cestrum nocturnum, Hibiscus species
etc.  are found suitable.
43. I have sandy  textured soil. Can I use blue grass for lawn making?
Blue grass is suitable only for acid  soil and performs better in higher elevations. For sandy soil, you can use Japan grass  which performs better even under open sunny situation.
44. The leaves of some  pot plants are found droopy and dusty. How to recover these plants?
When the leaves of the pot plants  droop, it is a sign that the plant is either in need of water or suffering from  water stagnation at the root. Spraying the plant surfaces through a fine  syringe nose cleans the leaves, creates a moist atmosphere and thus assist in  promoting their functions.
45. What is the  irrigation interval for lawn?
During autumn and winter months,  watering is done at an interval of 10 days whereas during spring and summer  months, it should be done at an interval of 7 days. Above all, irrigation  should be done compulsorily after every fertilizer application.
46. In my garden, the  lawn became too hard and compact. How to overcome this?
The lawn can be scraped to overcome  this problem. It is done to renovate the old lawn when it becomes old and grass  becomes compact. After 3-4 years, during June month, lawn should be scraped  completely with the help of garden raker and raking should be done both ways.  Otherwise, by using the digging fork, the soil is digged without lifting the  soil and uprooting the grass, aeration is provided to the soil thereby making  the soil loose and enabling the new growth.
47. How to maintain a  lawn in a definite shape?
The excess side growth found beyond  the boundary line must be trimmed then and there to maintain the definite  shape.
48. What is the cost of  square feet of lawn?
A square feet of lawn costs about  20-25 square feet.
49. The shrubs in my  garden are found to have some weak branches and old branches. At what height,  these should be cut back?
The shrubs need careful pruning. Those  which flower during winter months should be pruned at the end of summer season  whereas others at the end of winter season. Depending upon the form and age  cutting back the growth of the shrub leads to better performance of the plant.  All the superfluous growth, ole or weak branches are best cut at ground level  or as low as possible without leaving the stub.
50. How to grow trees  with straight trunk?
Staking should be done to attain the  trees with straight trunk. If not, the trunk would bed and plants make abnormal  growth. Stake should be such that it suits the size of the tree and should be  strong enough to provide the support. Straight bamboos or iron bars should be  used for staking. The stakes must be placed about 5 cm away from the main trunk  so that it does not harm root system.
51. The young growing  trees are found to have a shapeless growth. What kind of practice must be  followed for obtaining the trees with preferable shape and size?
All dead wood, misshapen or dangerous  branches hanging over roads, buildings, etc. should be cut. Damaged or decayed  branches should be cut away. All cuts more than 5 cm should be painted with  Bordeaux mixture against the attack of pathogens.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2014.