Glossary :: P
Water holding capacity
Â
The weight of the water  held by a given quantity of absolute dry soil when saturated.
Watershed
A  watershed is a hydrological unit or a piece of land that drains at a common  point. This natural unit is evolved through the interaction or rainwater with  land mass and typically comprises of arable lands, non-arable lands and natural  drainage lines in rainfed areas. A watershed may range from 4-5 hectares to  thousands of square kilometers.
Watershed management
:
Regulation of the  aggregate resources of a watershed for conserving water and controlling erosion  and stream flow of floods is called watershed management. The objective of  watershed management is to meet the problems of land and water use not in terms  of anyone resource, but on the basis that all the resources are interdependent  and therefore must be considered together. Watershed management calls for the  following measures for integrated watershed planning- agronomic measures of  soil conservation on agricultural lands; mechanical measures of soil  conservation on agricultural lands; tree canopy improvements; pastureland  management; gully control; soil- conservation dams; control of stream bank  erosion; small dams for farm ponds and supplemental reservoirs for irrigation;  irrigation works; small dams for interposing intermediate base levels of stream  erosion; dams and other structures for the control of mountain torrents; works  of artificial recharge of ground water; protection of wild life habitats;  hydro- electric works; regulation of flood waters by dams and dyes.
Watershed
An  area of land that collects and discharges water into a single stream or other  outlet. Also called a catchment or drainage basin.
Wether
A castrated male sheep.
Wind erosion
:
The detachment,  transportation, and deposition of soil by the action of wind. The removal and  redeposition may be in more or less uniform layers or as localized below out  and dines.
Wind- vane
:
Device  used to indicate the directions from which the wind is blowing.