Horticulture :: FAQs_Vegetables
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: FAQs :: Vegetables
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS - VEGETABLE  CROPS
1. How can I control  fruit borer  in Tomato?
Helicoverpa armigera
and
Spodoptera litura
(common for both)
i.  Grow simultaneously 40 days old American tall marigold and 25 days old tomato  seedlings @ 1:16 rows.
ii.  Set up pheromone traps @ 12/ha.
iii.  Collection and destruction of damaged fruits and grown up caterpillars.
iv.  carbaryl 50WP 2 g/lit or
Bacillus thuringiensis
2g/lit  or quinalphos 2.5 ml/lit.
v.  Release
Trichogramma chilonis
@  50000/ha/release coinciding with flowering time and based on ETL.
For
Helicoverpa armigera
Helicoverpa armigera
NPV 1.5 x 1012 POBs/ha
For
Spodoptera litura
Spodoptera litura
NPV 1.5 x 1012 POBs/ha
Provide  poison bait with carbaryl 1.25 kg, rice bran 12.5 kg, jaggery 1.25 kg and water  7.5 lit/ha.
2.  Suggest some ways to control spotted wilt virus in tomato.
Carbofuran  3G 1kg. a.i./ha in nursery at sowing and second application at 1.25 kg  a.i./ha 10 days after transplanting in mainfield and, 40, 55 days after transplanting.
3. What is the seed rate  for hybrid tomato?
150 g/ha
4. Is there any  alternate to boost the yield in brinjal?
Spray 2 ppm (1 ml in 500 lit)  triacontanol + Sodium borate or Borax 35 mg/lit of water 15 days after  transplanting and at the time of full bloom to increase the yield.
5. In my Brinjal field  one or two plants are having very small leaves. What is the problem and remedy  for that?
It is mainly due to virus disease  problem called ‘little leaf of brinjal’. This can be controlled by removing the  affected plants in the early stage and spray Methyl dematon 25 EC 2 ml/lit to  control the vector.
6. Certain plants in my  bhendi field show yellow coloured leaves? What is the
problem  and how to rectify that?
This is mainly due to the virus  infection. The virus mainly transmitted through white flies.
7. How can I increase  the quality of chilli fruits?
Application of potassium in the form  of Potassium Sulphate will increase the quality in chilli crop.
8. A severe flower drop  was noticed in chilli. Howe to control that?
Spray NAA 10 ppm (10 mg/lit of water)  on 60 and 90 days after planting to increase the fruit set.
9. Can I grow capsicum under  commercial cultivation?
Under shade nets the capsicum is grown  on commercials scale.
10. Can I grow paprika  under open condition?
Paprika cannot be grown under open  condition high temperature conditions/ belts. Hence it is best grown under  coconut shade/under shade net conditions.
11. Can I use copper  fungicides to cucurbitaceous vegetables? If not, why?
DDT, Lindane 1.3 % dust, copper and  sulphur dust should not be recommended to cucurbitaceous vegetables, since they  are phytotoxic in nature.
12. Guar gum is  extracted from which plant?
Cluster beans
13. Name some dolichous  bean varieties suitable for growing in pandals.
CO-1,  CO-2,   CO-3, CO-4,   CO-5 and Pusa Early Prolific
14. Name some varieties  in annual moringa?
PKM-1, PKM-2 and KM-1
15. What is the seed  rate required for raising 1 ha of annual moringa
500 grams
16. Hairy caterpillar is  a big problem for me in moringa crop. How to control that?
i. Use flame torch when the  caterpillar settle at the trunk
ii. Spray Chloripyriphos or Quinalphos  2 ml/lit.
17. How many number of  fruits can be harvested in a tree in one year?
220 – 225
18. How to control  diamond back moth in cabbage?
i.  Grow mustard as intercrop as 20:1 ratio to attract diamond back moths for  oviposition.
ii. Periodically spray the  mustard crop with insecticide to avoid the dispersal of the larvae.
iii.  Install pheromone traps at 12/ha.
iv.  Spray cartap hydrochloride 1 g/lit or
Bacillus  thuringiensis
2 g/lit at primordial stage (ETL 2 larvae/plant)
v.  Spray NSKE 5 % after primordial stage.
vi.  Release parasite
Diadegma semiclausum
at  50,000/ha, 60 days after planting.
19. Certain plants roots  are forming club shaped appearance? What is the reason and how to control that?
Seed  treatment at 10 g/ kg of seeds or soil application @ 2.5 kg/ha or seedling dip  in solution of 5g/ litre with Pseudomonas fluorescens. Dip the seedlings in  Carbendazim solution (1 – 2 g/lit) for 2 minutes.  Drench the soil around the seedlings in the  main field with Carbendazim @ 1 g/lit of water.   Follow crop rotation.  Crucifers  should be avoided for three years.
20. What is meant by  whip tail of cauliflower?
This  is caused by Boron deficiency. It appears as water soaked areas and later  changes into rusty brown. Spray one kg of Borax in 500 lit of water 30 days  after planting.
21. Some plants show  smaller curds. What is the problem?
The  term buttoning is applied to the development of small curds or buttons. The  plants do not develop normally and leaves remain small and do not cover the  developing curds. Deficiency of Nitrogen and planting the early varieties late  may cause these symptoms. Avoid transplanting aged seedlings.
22. I can notice certain  cauliflower plants without production of curds? Why?
Blind-cauliflower  plants are those without terminal buds. The leaves are large, thick, leathery  and dark green. It is due to the prevalence of low temperature when the plants  are young or due to damage to the terminal bud during handling the plants or  due to injury by pests.
23. Name some carrot  varieties suited for plain region.
India Gold, Pusa Kesar and Half Long
24. What is the ideal  season for planting of carrot in plains?
August
25. Suggest some of the  radish varieties suited for growing in plain region.
Co 1, Pusa Rashmi, Pusa Chetki, Pusa Desi,  Japanese white and Arka Nishant
26. When I cut the radish  a pronounced spongy and pithy region is notices. Why?
Harvesting should be done at proper  time. The delay in harvest leads to pithyness in radish.
27. What is the compound  responsible for pungent flavour in radish?
Isothiocynate
28. What is the main  intercultural operation to be followed in beet root?
Thinning. One seed of beet root give 2  – 3 seedlings. This has to be thinned 10 – 15 days after planting to maintain  the required plant population.
29. When I am  cultivating potato, the cost of tuber itself occupies 2/3rd of cost  of cultivation. Is there any alternative to reduce the cost of tubers?
Potato can also be propagated through  true potato seeds. To raise one hectare of land 100 – 150 g of seeds are  sufficient. Thereby the costs of inputs are greatly reduced.
30. What is the plant  population to be maintained in sweet potato?
By adopting 20 cm spacing, in one  hectare 80,000 plants can be planted.
31. Sweet potato  harvested from my filed shows warts, punched / spots symptoms and market preference  is less. What is the reason and suggest some ways for controlling them?
This is mainly due to sweet potato  weevil infestation. This can be controlled by adopting the following the  control measure
i.  Remove previous sweet potato crop residues and alternate host i.e.,
Ipomoea
sp. and destroy them.
ii.  Use pest free planting materials.
iii.  Dip the planting material in fenthion 100 EC or fenitrothion 50 EC .
iv.  Rake up the soil and earth up at 50 days after planting.
v.  Drench the soil with endosulfan 35 EC or fenthion 100 EC at 2 ml/lit.  Spray any one of the insecticides, if needed.
vi.  Harvest the crop immediately after maturity and destroy the crop residues.
32. I am having  farmlands of clay soil type. Whether it is possible to cultivate tapioca in my  land?
No. Tapioca must be grown in red  laterite or loamy soils for better tuber development.
33. Can I use the  foliage of tapioca as cattle feed?
Yes. While using, the terminal  portions or buds has to be nipped off or removed.
34. I am having sago  industry. Can I use the peeled skin of tapioca tubers as cattle feed?
It should be properly dried in sun and  can be given to cattles. The raw or fresh skins of tubers are very toxic since  it contains Hydrocyanic acid. This will be removed / denatured upon drying  under open sunlight. After proper treatment it can be fed to cattles.
35. In my tapioca field  most of the plants show crinkled leaves. Why?
This is mainly due to cassava mosaic  disease. The virus is mainly transmitted by white flies. The vectors can be  controlled by spraying Methyl Dematon 3 ml/lit. While planting disease free  cuttings can be selected.
36. How many setts are  needed for planting one hectare of land?
17,000
37. I want to plant  tapioca under rainfed conditions. Is there any specialized
treatment  before planting of setts?
For rainfed conditions, treat the  setts with a mixture of potassium chloride @ 5 g/lit and micronutrients viz.,  ZnSo4 and FeSo4 @ 0.5 % for 20 minutes before planting.
38. Is there any  biofertilizers treatment for tapioca setts?
Dipping setts for 20 minutes in  Azospirillum and Phosphobacteria each at 30 g/lit is recommended for commercial  cultivation.
39. In my filed few  patches of tapioca plants shows pale green / yellow coloured leaves. What is  the corrective measure to be followed?
This is mainly due to iron and  micronutrient deficiency. This may be corrected by foliar spraying of 1.0 %  FeSo4 + 0.5 % ZnSo4 at 60 and 90 DAP.
40. Due to heavy rain during  cyclone season, the tapioca leaves are found to be drooping and drying. How to  prevent this?
i. Water stagnation due to heavy rain  causes tuber rot and thereby wilting of plants. Hence provide good drainage  facility.
ii. Spot drenching with copper  oxychloride 2.5 g/lit can be done.
41. How can I propagate  amorphophallus / elephant foot yam?
The tuber is cut into small bits in  such a way that each bit has atleast a small portion of the ring around each  bud.  There are also projections with  tender buds called “Arumbu”. These are removed before planting as they do not  give vigorous growth. An ordinary sized yam gives about 6 to 8 bits for  planting. The cut pieces are dipped in cow dung solution to prevent evaporation  of moisture from cut surface. In some places, the small round daughter corms  are also planted.
42. I want to cultivate  peruvalli kizhangu. Suggest some suitable varieties for
villupuram  conditions.
Co  1, Sree Roopa, Sree Keerthi, Sree Shilpa
43. Name some varieties  of siruvalli kizhangu for villupuram conditions.
Sree Latha, Sree Kala
44. In my onion field I  can notice few white patches along with slender black insect. What is the  control measure to be adopted for that?
It is mainly due to thrips  infestation. It can be controlled by Methyl Dematon 25 EC 1 mil/lit of water  along with 0.5 ml/lit of teepol (sticking agent).
45. In bellary onion,  how many days old seedlings can be used for transplanting in the main field?
45 days
46. Name the variety  suited for clipping type of amaranthus.
Co 3
47. What is the  amaranthus variety suitable for grain extraction?
Co 4
48. Amaranthus seeds are  very smaller and how can I use this little quantity of seed (2.5 kg) for one  hectare.
Broadcast the seeds evenly on the bed  after mixing with 10 parts of sand. After that apply Lindane 1.3 % dust @ 10  kg/ha around the beds to control ants, termites and other burrowing insects.
49. I am cultivating Co  4 amaranthus variety in 1 hectare of land. What is the
approximate  yield of grains?
2.4 t grains/ha in addition to 8 tones  of tender greens.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2008 - 2023.