TNAU Agritech Portal :: Crop Protection
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Farmers' Innovation
|
Publications
|
Contact
Crop protection :: Biological control :: introduction
Biological Control of Plant Pests, Disease and Weeds
While pursuing research on control of pests, diseases and weeds of economically important crops steady efforts have been made to develop cost-effective, eco-friendly, commercially viable mass production technologies of various biocontrol agents and improved formulations for use under the Integrated pest management (IPM) in the country. It has been envisaged to investigate the use of biopesticides/ natural enemies along with other components of IPM and integrated nutritive management (INM). During the year, a network programme on pheromones, and one for the management of
PartheniumĂ‚
weed have been initiated.
Integrated pest and nutrition management:
This programme being implemented at 14 centers in 12 states viz. Uttar Pradesh (IIPR, BHU), Uttaranchal (GBPUAT), Kerala (IISR), Jammu and Kashmir (RRL), Tamil Nadu (TNAU), Assam (AAU), Gujarat (GAU), Karnataka (UAS), Andhra Pradesh (RARS and CTRI), Maharashtra (PDKV), Orissa (OUAT) and Andaman & Nicobar (CARI) is to be concluded this year. The salient achievements are given below.
At UAS, Dharwad, bioefficacy of
Ă‚Â  Nomuraea rileyiĂ‚Â Ă‚
wasĂ‚Â  evaluated againstĂ‚
Spodoptera lituraĂ‚
andĂ‚
Helicoverpa
Ă‚
armigera
Ă‚Â on groundnut in the coastal agro-ecosystem of Karnataka.Ă‚Â  It was also evaluated on soybean in farmerĂ¢Â€Â™s fields over 150 acres in four villages againstĂ‚
S. lituraĂ‚
andĂ‚
Thysanoplusia orichalcea.
Ă‚Â  Results showed that insecticide treatment compared withĂ‚
N. rileyiĂ‚
is highly effective in reducing the pest population, foliage damage, pod damage besides increasing the yield.Ă‚Â Ă‚
N. rileyi
Ă‚Â is found to be cost promotive.Ă‚
N. rileyiĂ‚
was highly effective in managingĂ‚
Spodoptera lituraĂ‚
on capsicum under net house conditions. Bioassays againstĂ‚
S. lituraĂ‚
revealed that formulations based on sunflower, groundnut, sesame, soybean and castor oils were better than aqueous formulations.
INM/IPM practices were demonstrated on 100 ha farms in two villages of Krishna district by CTRI, Rajamundhri.Ă‚Â  In IPM villages, the major insect pests viz.,Ă‚
S. lituraĂ‚
andĂ‚
Heliothis armigeraĂ‚
populations were found to be notably less than in non-IPM (chemical control) villages. Natural enemies like apanteles, coccinellids and spider populations were more on groundnut in INM/IPM villages.Ă‚Â  The cost-benefit ratio was also higher (1:2.36) in IPM villages as compared to non-IPM villages (1:1.70).
At RRL, Jammu, about 1000 kg of the lignite-based formulations of bio-fertilizers, plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPRs) (
Rhizobium
,Ă‚
Azotobacter,
Ă‚
Azospirillum, Pseudomonas)
Ă‚Â and bio-control agentsĂ‚Â  (
Trichoderma viride
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
T. virens)
Ă‚Â were prepared by fermentation and supplied to SKUAST Jammu, SKUAST Srinagar and other agriculture agencies for field /frontline demonstrations.Ă‚Â  More than 125 ha area was covered under frontline demonstration crops such as beans, tomato, chillies, brinjal, knol-khol, onion, bhindi, cucurbits, pea, chickpea, and saffron in different agroclimatic zones of J&K state. The average increase in the yield of the crop was in the range of 2-47% and disease reduction in the range of 3.2-20%.Ă‚Â  Studies showed that the shelf life of the formulations in liquid state at +40C is 4-5 months.Ă‚Â  A microprocessor-controlled 75 litre fermentor withĂ‚
in situ
Ă‚Â autoclaving facilities was installed at SKUAST, Srinagar for the production of microbial biofertilizers and biocontrol agents in the state.
A study at IISR, Calicut on compatibility, stability and potential of biocontrol consortium on suppression ofĂ‚
Phytophthora
footrot of black pepper, 25 efficient strains of bacterial biocontrol agents were characterized based on carbon utilization, antibiotic sensitivity and utilization of succinic acid.Ă‚Â  Studies on temperature tolerance of the fungal biocontrol agent,
Trichoderma harzianum
Ă‚Â indicated that its viable population significantly reduced after 40oC. Siderophore-mediated antagonism was found to be the prominent mechanism of antagonism in the biocontrol agentĂ‚
Pseudomonas fluorescens
strains (IISR-6, IISR-11 and IISR-13) againstĂ‚
Phytopthora capsici
. Strains IISR-6 and IISR-51 were found to enhance root emergence and root proliferation in black pepper cuttings, which could be adopted for nursery disease management.
A directory of pathogens of tea pests has been made by AAU, Assam from the tea gardens of North East.Ă‚Â  From the different insect pests of tea, several entomopathogenic fungi (
Beauveria bassiana,
Ă‚
Helopaltis thevora
,Ă‚
Astycus chrysochlorus
,Ă‚
Penicillium)
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
actinomycetes (Paecilomyces carneus, Glyllotalpa africana,
Ă‚
Verticillium lecanii
,
Oligonychus coffeaeĂ‚
andĂ‚
Toxoptera aurantii)Ă‚
have been isolated. Besides, NPVs were also collected from bunch caterpillar (AbNPV), looper caterpillar (BsNPV) and lymantrid caterpillar.Ă‚Â  Mass production ofĂ‚
B. bassiana
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
V. lecanni
was starndardised and attempts were made to utilize locally available industrial wastes like rice hull, saw dust and rice bran.
Ă‚Â B. bassianaĂ‚
can be used effectively for suppressing the tea mosquito bug. Field efficacy data revealed that use of a formulation by combiningĂ‚
B. bassiana
Ă‚Â +Ă‚
V. lecaniiĂ‚
performed significantly better not only in suppressing the pest population, but also in enhancing the yield by 56% over the control. Furthermore, the microbials were found to be compatible with botanicals (azadirachtin). Studies conducted on storage and shelf life showed that in RH: SD: RB medium, theĂ‚
B. bassiana
Ă‚Â remains virulent up to one month of storage at room temperature (25 - 27Ă‚Â°C). In order to improve shelf life of the mass-produced mycoinsecticides, the medium was modified by supplementing it with chitin of different arthropods. Addition of crab and prawn chitin induced viability substantially. A regular survey and surveillance programme is underway at the center.
At IIPR, Kanpur, studies were conducted and biological control of gram pod borerĂ‚
Helicoverpa armigera
Ă‚Â was demonstrated in chickpea, pigeonpea and sunflower. Field demonstrationĂ‚Â  ofĂ‚
Ha
NPVĂ‚Â  of chickpea revealed that average pod damage due toĂ‚
H. armigeraĂ‚
Ă‚Â in treated chickpea was 2.4% against 10.7% of untreated plants. Five Isolates ofĂ‚
Ha
NPV were screened and Kanpur isolate was found to be efficient. It was observed that different adjuvants ofĂ‚
H. armigera
(Kanpur isolate) act differently on increasing its efficacy and bringing about mortality of the insect.
An effective IPM package has been developed for the management of pests and diseases of tomato, chillies, cauliflower and cabbage of eastern Uttar Pradesh at IIVR, Varanasi.Ă‚Â  NPV ofĂ‚
Helicoverpa armigera
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
Spodoptera litura
,Ă‚
T. harzianum
,Ă‚
T. viride
,Ă‚
T. virens
,Ă‚
Aspergillus niger
-V isolates andĂ‚
Bacillus subtilis
Ă‚Â were isolated and characterized.Ă‚Â  Among the different SLNPV cultures, Cuddalore was the best on the basis of LD50 with 2.5 x 102 POB count/ml.Ă‚Â  Performance of
T. viride
Ă‚Â was better than other bioagents in relation to damping off.Ă‚Â  The most effective and economic substrate for mass multiplication ofĂ‚
Trichoderma
Ă‚Â is rice husk and rice bran mixed with sorghum in 1:1 ratio.Ă‚Â  Maintenance of 5 to 6.5 pH and temperature 25oC is best for prolonged storage of NPV solution.Ă‚Â  Integration of NPV and endosulfan has been found more effective againstĂ‚
H. armigera
.
At AU, Tamil Nadu, strains ofĂ‚
Trichogramma chilonis Ishii,
Ă‚Â tolerant to high temperature (320 C and 340 C) were developed and compared with normal strains for parasitic qualities. The temperature-tolerant strains were on par with normal strains and did not loose any one of the parasitic qualities studied. Three new fungal pathogens viz.Ă‚
Fusarium solani, Penicillium janthinellumĂ‚
andĂ‚
Mucor prayagensisĂ‚
were recorded on the rice leaf folder caterpillars,Ă‚
C. naphalocrocis medinalis guen
. Talc-based dry preparations containing spores were prepared as biopesticides. Similarly, oil formulations against RLF were found to be effective inĂ‚Â  field evaluation.
National biocontrol network programme:
The salient achievements of R&D projects are as follows:
Molecular studies on biocontrol agents
With a view to developing an authentic data base of agriculturally and industrially important strains of fungi and bacteria, a programme on molecular characterization of selected strains is underway at RRL, Jammu. Primers have been designed for the ribosomal typing of fungal isolates collected from various centers. RAPD and RFLP studies of various fungal and bacterial isolates have been carried out. Chemical markers are being developed for different fungi using techniques like MALDI-TOF and LCMS.
Molecular characterization ofĂ‚
Macrophomina phaseolinaĂ‚
has been initiated at BHU, Varanasi and a mini-prep method of direct isolation of genomic DNA from the culture plates has been developed and PCR technique has been optimized using rDNA spacer regions i.e. internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and intergenic spacers (IGS). No polymorphic pattern among the isolates was found by using ITS. Uncut IGS primers produced sufficient level of discrimination within the isolates ofĂ‚
M. phaseolina.Ă‚
More than 80 RAPD primers were tried using different strains ofĂ‚
M. phaseolina
. RAPD-PCR generated very distinct multiple products showing considerable variability among the isolates. The number of amplified bands were variable, depending on the primers or the isolates used. Good polymorphic results obtained with 4 RAPD primers i.e. OPAO1,OPAO3, OPAO4 and OPAO9. The data obtained by these primers could be used for generating RAPD-SCAR probes.
At UAS, Dharwad, studies are in progress on genomic flux and molecular analysis of insecticide resistance in cotton bollworm,Ă‚
Helicoverpa armigera.Ă‚
A cotton cultivation map of south India and schedules for insecticide usage pattern, phenotyping and weather parameters were prepared. Sampling locations were identified, based on the map and insecticide usage. Cotton bollworm sampling was carried out from all the marked locations as and when the incidence prevailed. Technical grade insecticides were used in identified locations to monitor insecticide bioassay in field population. Cry 1Ac protein from hyper expression vector Pkk223-3 inĂ‚
E. coli
Ă‚Â IM103 was purified and used for bioassay. Genomic DNA was isolated from
Ă‚Â Helicoverpa armigera
Ă‚Â and genetic diversity analysis was carried out using RAPD. Insecticide bioassay for field population were carried out and insecticide resistance folds for all the insecticides were determined. Geographically proximal population ofĂ‚
H. armigera
Ă‚Â shared greater nucleotide similarity, whereas Dharwad population was found to be genetically distinct. Genetic similarity coefficient within each population varied between 0.24 and 0.49. DNA fingerprinting of geographical populations of cotton bollworm and molecular analysis of insecticide resistance are under progress.
Large number of bacterial isolates (from rhizospere soil) were screened at the University of Madras, Chennai for antifungal activity againstĂ‚
Fusarium moniliforme
Ă‚Â and
Ă‚Â Curvularia lunataĂ‚
to find out a candidate organism for cloning the chitinase gene.Ă‚Â  An isolate showing very high activity was selected and characterized using biochemical characterization and rRNA sequencing and taxonomically identified asĂ‚
Bacillus subtilis
.Ă‚Â  25 kd protein has been purified to homogeneity using a chitin column and the protein is being used to raise polyclonal antiserum so that it can be used to screen bacteria for presence of similar proteins.Ă‚
Studies on biological control of bacterial blight of rice caused byĂ‚
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzaeĂ‚
have been undertaken usingĂ‚Â  bacterial antagonists by traditional and molecular approaches. Out of a total of 1,175 plant-associated bacteria collected, 637 were fluorescent bacteria, while the remaining were nonfluorescentĂ‚
Bacillus spp
Ă‚Â strains
.
Ă‚Â Forty-twoĂ‚
Bacillus
strains and 278 fluorescent strains of bacteria inhibited the growth ofĂ‚
Xanthomonas oryzae pv
.Ă‚
Oryzae in vitro
. A PCR-based screening method was developed for the production of DAPG by the fluorescent bacteria. PCR primers, Phl2a and Phl2b were used to detect and amplify 745-bp fragment characteristic of DAPG. The role of DAPG for suppression of rice bacterial blight is being evaluated in the net-house and field experiments. Five efficientĂ‚
BacillusĂ‚
strains (
Bacillus lentus
,Ă‚
B.
cereus,Ă‚
B. circulans
,Ă‚
B. sp-1
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
B. sp-2)
Ă‚Â were characterized.Ă‚Â  When used for treatment of rice plants of cultivars, IR24 and Jyothi, these bacteria afforded a maximum of 50-55% bacterial blight suppression in the field.Ă‚Â  Additionality, treatments withĂ‚
Bacillus sppĂ‚
enhanced rice growth, tiller numbers (3-fold) and grain yield (203-fold).
Studies are underway on molecular analysis of antifungal activities of antagonistic bacteria at Pondicherry University.Ă‚Â  Fluorescent pseudomonad bacteria exhibiting broad-spectrum antifungal activities were isolated. The metabolites were purified and identified as dimer of phenazine-1-carboxylic acid based on mass spectrometric as well as high-resolution NMR analyses. Characterization of another new antifungal metabolite is under progress.
At KFRI, Kerala, studies have been undertaken on tracing the origin and spread of teak defoliator outbreaks through a molecular approach. Data on spatial and temporal pattern of teak defoliator (
Hyblaea puera
) infestation was gathered. Larval samples form endemic, epicenter and epidemic populations were collected, preserved, and used for molecular studies.Ă‚Â  Standardized techniques were used for molecular characterization and estimation of parentage inĂ‚
Hyblaea puera.
Ă‚Â  About 100 RAPD primers were screened for insect specificity and 10 most polymorphic primers were identified for genetic variation studies. Using the selected markers the relationship between endemic and epicenter populations (inter populations), within endemic populations (intra populations) and between populations (inter individual) was estimated.Ă‚Â Ă‚
Studies on engineering sheath blight resistance in rice has been carried out by employingĂ‚
TrichodermaĂ‚
chitinase genes at TNAU, Coimbatore. Two chitinases (42 kDa and 30 kDa) were detected in the culture filtrates ofĂ‚
Trichoderma viride
MNT7 by western blotting using an anti-barley chitinase antiserum. Purification of theĂ‚
Trichoderma virideĂ‚
MNT7 42 kDa/30 k Da chitinases was achieved. MNT7 42 kDa /30 kDa chitinases were characterized using substrate inducibility, glucose repressibility and antifungal activity against the target pathogen,Ă‚
R. solani
.Ă‚Â  Ă‚
At IIHP, Palampur, an ELISA-based diagnostic kit has been developed against
Ă‚Â bean yellow mosaic potyvirus
Ă‚Â (BYMV). Different varieties of gladiolus were screened for the presence of BYMV using this diagnostic kit. This kit has been found comparable with the reference kit. Being based on polyclonal antibodies, this kit also detects other strains of BYMV infecting other crops and would beĂ‚Â  cost effective.Ă‚
Microbial pesticides and other natural enemies
A virulent isolate of NPV ofĂ‚
Amsacta albistriga
Ă‚Â has been identified at the University of Madras, Chennai from Dharwad, Karnataka for the management of groundnut red hairy caterpillar, which is found to be 5.6 - 8.4 fold more effective than existing isolates.Ă‚
Calotropis
Ă‚Â is identified as suitable host plant for mass multiplication of NPV ofĂ‚
A. albistriga
Ă‚Â under laboratory condition through which theĂ‚
in vivo
Ă‚Â yield of NPV has been enhanced by 1.08 - 2.35 fold when compared to other plant hosts.Ă‚Â  Administration of NPV along with 10% aqueous extract ofĂ‚
Tribulus terrestris
Ă‚Â was able to increase theĂ‚
in vivo
yield of NPV significantly from 1.34 - 1.55 fold.Ă‚Â  The adjuvant mix, NPV+ urea 0.5% + Ranipal BVN 0.1% and crude sugar 0.5% is found to be effective in enhancing the virulence, resulting in 96.7, 93.3 and 81.7 per cent mortality to II, III and IV instars larvae, respectively. Ă‚
Large-scale demonstration of the product formulation of NPV ofĂ‚
Hyblaea pureaĂ‚
(HpNPV) was conducted for the management of teak defoliator by the scientists of KFRI, Trichu.Ă‚Â  A new insect rearing tube has been designed and fabricated for larval rearing and retrieval, dispensing of diet and inoculum. Seven storable formulations of HpNPV have been developed and bioassayed for their efficacy under laboratory conditions.Ă‚Â  Field testing of formulatedĂ‚Â  freeze-driedĂ‚Â  wettable powder form of HpNPVĂ‚Â  were carried out and compared with the unformulated product. A high pressure mechanized spraying system was developed and evaluated for field application of virus in teak plantation.Ă‚Â Ă‚
Studies on the biological control of mono-and multi-pathogenic diseases of chickpea and pigeonpea (caused by fungi and nematodes) have been undertaken at AMU, Aligarh. Root-knot disease was significantly controlled due to application ofĂ‚
P. fluorescens
. Its application decreased the severity of galling by 9-11% and increased the yield by 14%. The combination ofĂ‚
P. fluorescensĂ‚
and
Ă‚Â T. harzianumĂ‚
was found highly effective inĂ‚Â Ă‚Â  controlling the wilt of chickpea in the presence or absence of root-knot nematode leading to 31-57% increase in the yield.Ă‚
Isolation of virulent strains of baculovirus is being carried out for the management of rainfed groundnut red-hairy caterpillar at TNAU, Madurai. Biological activity of four geographic isolates of NPV of
Ă‚Â Albistriga
Ă‚Â under laboratory condition revealed that the isolate from Dharwad was more effective against II, III and IV instar ofĂ‚Â Ă‚Â Ă‚
A. albistriga
. Two rounds of application of Dharwad isolate of NPV formulation (with other constituents) have been found very effective in reducing the population ofĂ‚
A. albistrigaĂ‚
in groundnut crop.
At UAS, Bangalore, attempts have been made towards integrated management of root-knot nematode in tomato and burrowing nematode in banana by utilizing indigenous types of mycorrhizal bioagent viz.Ă‚
Glomus fasciculatum
. Fifty seven isolates were found from the rhizosphere of plantation crops, fruit crops, vegetable crops, oil seeds, pulses, cereals, flower crops and others in different districts of Karnataka. Selected 13 isolates from Southern Karnataka were screened against burrowing nematode (
Rotylenchulus similesĂ‚
)on banana and root-knot nematode, (
Meloidogyne incognitaĂ‚
) on tomato.Ă‚Â  Udupi areca isolate was found to be effective in improving the host parameters and decreasing the nematode population ofĂ‚
R. similesĂ‚
Ă‚Â on banana, while Shimoga banana isolate was better in improving the host parameters and decreasing the nematode population againstĂ‚
M. incognitaĂ‚
Ă‚Â on tomato.Ă‚
Mass multiplication of phytoseiid mite predators (
Amblyseius longispinosus, A. tetranychivoursĂ‚
andĂ‚
Typholodrmus rickeri)
have been standardized. The predates were released in selected poly-houses growing roses and carnation around Bangalore, Hosur and Pune for management of spider mites.
Ă‚Â A survey by ACRI, Tiruchirappali, of major betelvine growing districts (Tiruchy, Karur, Salem and Coimbatore) revealed the association ofĂ‚
M. incognita
Ă‚Â in pathogenic level showing a gall index of 3-5 scale. Talc-based formulations were prepared with the three indigenous strains ofĂ‚
Pseudomonas fluoresens
Ă‚Â (Pfbv-2, Pfbv-5 and Pfbv-9) and tested on seed virus. Seedvines were treated and planted. Two strains (Pfbv-2 and Pfbv-5) showed enhanced growth and all the three strains were found to show inhibitory effect againstĂ‚
PhytophthoraĂ‚
underĂ‚
in vitro
Ă‚Â conditions.Ă‚Â  All the three strains were also found effective againstĂ‚
Meloidogyne incognita.
Ă‚
At RRL, Jorhat, crop enhancement and development of induced disease resistance have been established in chick pea and pigeon pea against fusarial wilt pathogens through combined use of PGPR and rhizobial strains. Also, bacterization with RRLJ 134 enhanced the rooting percentage, emergence of leaves and chlorophyll content of the new leaves of the tea cuttings grown inĂ‚
F. lamoensisĂ‚
infested and pathogen free soils. Reduction of the brown rot disease in tea cutting grown pathogen infested soils was also observed.Ă‚
Novel insecticidal toxins have been isolated, at PDBC, Bangalore, purified and characterized fromĂ‚
Photorhabdus
Ă‚Â and
Xenorhabdus spp.
Ă‚Â (enterobacteria) from bacterial cells and cell-free culture filtrates ofĂ‚
Photorhabdus
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
Xenorhabdus
spp. They were examined for their toxicity against the larvae ofĂ‚
Helicoverpa armigera
,Ă‚
Phthorimaea operculella, Plutella xylostellaĂ‚
andĂ‚
Spodoptera litura.
Ă‚Â  Larval mortality of the insects under study was higherĂ‚Â  in cell-free culture filtrates than in bacterial cell treated condition. Both the cells and cell-free culture filtrates ofĂ‚
Photorhabdus
Ă‚Â recorded higher larval mortality compared to that ofĂ‚
Xenorhabdus.
Ă‚Â  The larvae ofĂ‚
P. xylostella
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
P. operculella
Ă‚Â recorded hundred percent mortality in 48 h of exposure to the cell-free culture filtrates, while those ofĂ‚
H.armigera
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
Spodoptera litura
Ă‚Â recorded a maximum larval mortality of 58 and 49 percent, respectively.Ă‚Â  Late instar (3rd ) larvae ofĂ‚
H.armigera
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
S.litura
Ă‚Â recorded lower mortality compared to their early instars (2nd ) when exposed to cell-free culture filtrates of the bacteria.
Botanical pesticides
At SPIC Science Foundation, Chennai, botanical antifungal formulation was field evaluated against leaf spot disease of black gram, green gram and red gram at Vamban.Ă‚Â  Dosage of antifungal formulation for different crops was determined and its effects on the control of predators and beneficial insects were observed. Large scale production of the formulation and its field demonstration were conducted for paddy, groundnut, grapes, tea and coffee at different locations. Extraction, enrichment and isolation of limonoids from selected Indian Meliaceae plants (
Chukrasia tabulata
Ă‚Â andĂ‚
Xylocarpus mekongensis)Ă‚
have been carried out. Groundnut rust disease on detached leaves was applied as the antifungal bioassay system for extract fractions and pure compounds ofĂ‚
Chukrasia tabulata
.Methanol extract showed antifungal activity againstĂ‚
Chukrasia lindemuthianum
Ă‚Â at 40mg.
Ă‚Â Spodoptera febrifugaĂ‚
Ă‚Â extracts inhibitedĂ‚
Phylloscricta sp., C.lindemuthianumĂ‚
and
Ă‚Â Pestalotiopsis mangiferaeĂ‚
Ă‚Â at 20mg.Neem oil and neem leaf extracts did not show inhibition even at 100mg, where as neem bark extract showed inhibition againstĂ‚
C.lindemuthianum, Alternaria alternataĂ‚
Ă‚Â and
Phylloscricta spĂ‚
Ă‚Â at 20mg.
Extracts ofĂ‚
Linostoma decandrum, Clerodendron inermeĂ‚
and
Ă‚Â Aegle marmelosĂ‚
have been tested for tea pest management at AAU, Assam.Ă‚Â  Toxicity of the aqueous extracts was tested against the red spider mite,Ă‚
Oligonychus coffeae
Ă‚Â and the result revealed that the root extract was more toxic than that of leaves.Ă‚
In a multicomponent defense study for insect control at IBRC, Jalandhar, it has been established for the first time that non-azadirachtin type of limonoids are synergistic in specific combinations vis-ĂƒÂ -vis the structural chemistry of the compounds. Attempts are being made towards developing useful multi-component formulations where synergistic non-azadirachtin type of limnoids would be quantified as is done in case of azadirachtin.Ă‚Â  This center has also isolated toosendanin fromĂ‚
Melia dubia
Ă‚Â species (which is known to occur in ChineseĂ‚Â Ă‚
Melia toosendan
Ă‚Â ) and have been found as feeding deterrent forĂ‚
Helicoverpa armigeraĂ‚
larvae.Ă‚Â  Efficacy of toosendanin in combination with other allelochemicals of this plant is under investigation.
At IARI, New Delhi characterisation of potential biopesticide molecules from fungal biocontrol agents (
Trichoderma harzianum)
Ă‚Â is being done. Secondary metabolites have been isolated and identified by spectroscopic (IR, NMR and Mass) techniques from cultural filtrate ofĂ‚
T. harzianum.
Among the secondary metabolites identified, the 6-pentyl-alpha-pyrone has been found most effective againstĂ‚
Sclerotium rolfsiiĂ‚
(ED50 = 188.32 ppm) andĂ‚
Rhizoctonia solaniĂ‚
(ED50 = 99.55 ppm). The powered dried mycelium ofĂ‚
T. harzianumĂ‚
retained its viability and antagonistic activity against a number of pathogenic fungi even after one year. Secondary metabolites such as palmitic acid; 3-methyl heptadecanol; ketotriol; erogosteol and 6-[3, 6-dihydroxy-7-(2-furano)]-a-pyrone haveĂ‚Â  beenĂ‚Â  isolated and identified from dried hyphae ofĂ‚
T. harzianum.
Ă‚Â  A method has been standardized for the synthesis ofĂ‚Â Ă‚Â  6-Pentyl-alpha-pyrone.
Studies on the management of three major diseases viz. fruit rot, anthracnose and fruit fly diseases of guava have been undertaken using bioactive compounds from natural plant resources at Bioved, Allahabad. Physico-chemical composition of fruit and fruit yield of seven guava varieties were analysed. Between 30 and 40% losses were recorded by fungal infection due toĂ‚
Rhizopus stolonifer, Gloeosporium psidii, Colletotrichum psidii, Pestalotia, psidii, Phomopsis psidii, Penicillium notatum, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus niger, Alternaria sp., Mucor sp., Cladosporium sp.Ă‚
andĂ‚
fruit fly-Dacus dorsails etc.Ă‚
Apple colour variety of guava is more resistant as compared to other varieties. Latex of three plants viz.
Argemone mexicana, Carica papaya and Croton bonplandianumĂ‚
at 100% concentration showed the highest inhibition at 94.3%, 93.17% and 89.90% respectively in mycelial growth ofĂ‚
Rhizopus stolonifer,Ă‚
and at 92.04%, 90% and 88.76% in
Gloeosporium psidii.Ă‚Â  Citrus sinensis, Eucalyptus globules, Tagetes erectaĂ‚
andĂ‚
Ocimum sanctumĂ‚
oil were found as a repellent botanical insecticide for the control of fruit fly-Ă‚
Dacus dorsalisĂ‚
at the concentration range of 0.1% to 0.5%.
Pheromones and semiochemicals
At IICT, Hyderabad, studies on the synthesis and field evaluation of pheromone system is underway for the monitoring /mass trapping of brinjal shoot and fruit borer (
Leucinodes orbonlis
) as a component of IPM. A variable synthetic route for the synthesis of two-pheromone components of brinjal shoot and fruit borer on 5 gm batch size has been developed.Ă‚Â  Quality assessment of the pheromone components were conducted by capillary gas chromatography followed byĂ‚Â  field experiments during the Kharif season of 2002.
In a collaborative project at NCL, Pune and MPKV, Rahuri, tritrophic relationship between the host crop and insect pest-natural enemy complex inĂ‚Â  cottonĂ‚Â  and chickpea has been established. Two types of olfactometers were fabricated indigenously to study orientation of parasites at NCL, Pune.Ă‚Â  Colonies ofĂ‚
Helicoverpa armigeraĂ‚
andĂ‚
Chrysoperta carnea
were established in the laboratory.Ă‚Â  Bioassays were standardized to study orientation of parasites with the help of Y shaped olfactometer and four volatiles were tested.Ă‚Â  A filter paper bioassay was standardized to study parasitizaton and 29 volatiles and plant oils and their combinations were studied for their effect on parasitization.Ă‚Â  Different parameters such as light intensity, temperature and color were studied to get optimum value for maximum parasitization.Ă‚Â  Method was also standardized to study EAG responses of bothĂ‚
Trichogramma chilonisĂ‚
females andĂ‚
Chrysoperla carneaĂ‚
females and larvae and EAG responses of total 32 volatiles and green leaf extracts were examined.
Patents:
Patent is being filed by DBT for the position of the proton of a dimer- of phenazine-1-carboxylic acid of a compound from fluroscentĂ‚
Pseudomonas
Ă‚Â exhibiting broad spectrum antifungal activities. Patents have also been filed for the photostability process of neem constituents and also for the development of two effective bioformulations ofĂ‚
Beuvaria bassiana.
Patents for the mass production technologies ofĂ‚
Nomuraea rileyi, Trichoderma viride, Trichoderma virens, Beauveria bassiana, Verticillium lecanii, Myrothecium verrucariaĂ‚
and for the two effective bioformulation of bassiana have been filed
.
Ă‚
Popularization of biopesticide technology:
Several extension activities have been organised at the instance of DBT for creating awareness among the farmers on the large scale use of biocontrol agents under IPM. Biopesticide product formulations developed at different centres were distributed among the farmers as a free incentive for use in various regional crops. The extension activities included regional workshops, agroclinics, agrifair, farmers ghosthi, krishi melas and farmers field etc.Ă‚Â  Besides, training programmes were also organized for farmers and extension functionaries, scientists and progressive entrepreneur on the production and management strategies of biocontrol agents. About 58,000 farmers benefited and around 1700 handouts in various regional languages were published and widelyĂ‚Â  distributed among the agricultural scientists and the end users. DBT has also brought out several technical brochures highlighting the achievements of various projects and giving the details of the technologies developed.
Technology transfer:
Mass production technologies of biocontrol agents/biopesticides have been transferred during the year. Fermentation-based technologies of three biocontrol agents (
Trichoderma viride, T. virens, Bacillus spp.)Ă‚
and three biofertilisers (
Rhizobium spp, Azotobacter spp., and Azospirillium spp.)Ă‚
have been developed at RRL Jammu and transferred as an integrated package for biopesticides (
T. viride
Ă‚Â &Ă‚
T. virens
). Rhizobium Biofertilizers have been transferred to three industries viz., M/s Pratishta Industires Ltd., Secundrabad, M/s Javeri Agro-industries & Investment Co. Ltd.,Ă‚Â  Amrawati and M/s Pragati Biotech, Gurgaon. Mass production technology ofĂ‚
Aspergillus niger
Ă‚Â (AN27) has also been transferred to M/s Cadila Pharma, Ahmedabad. Other technologies forĂ‚
T. harzianum, T. chilonis, Chrysoperla carnea,
Ă‚Â HaNPV and SlNPV and pheromone technology for the management of internode borer of sugarcane and rice yellow stem borer of rice have been standardizedĂ‚Â  and validated.
Since the registration has become a prerequisite for the commercialization of biopesticides, the department has taken suitable measures/ action to facilitate the registration and regulatory procedures.Ă‚Â  At the initiative of the department, the guidelines for registration have been simplified and streamlined.Ă‚Â  Department has gone one step further in this direction and decided to evolve an action plan for registration of potential biopesticide technologies which have been developed and validated through R&D efforts.Ă‚Â  The Dept. is providing support for the generation of toxicological data for registration purpose for identified microbials in a phased manner.Ă‚Â  In the first phase, toxicological data for about nine microorganisms and their formulations are being generated at two identified CSIR centers.
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Publications
|
Contact Us
Ă‚Â© TNAU 2008-2024 All Rights Reserved.