ORGANIC FARMING :: Frequently Asked Questions
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
Organic Farming :: Frequently Asked Questions
Compost
What is compost?
Compost is well  decomposed organic wastes like plant residues, animal dung, and urine earth  from cattle sheds, waste fodder etc.
How good compost are prepared?
Compost making is the  process of decomposing organic wastes in a pit. Site for compost making is  selected should be at a high level and water should not pond during monsoon  season. Pit should be of 3’ depth and 6’ to 8’ width. Length may be of any  convenient size. The process is as follows:
Make slurry of the cattle dung with water.
Prepare 6” layer of organic wastes – plant residues,  sweepings from the cattle shed, waste fodder, dried plants stalks and leaves  etc. and sprinkle water to just moisten it. (Over watering should be avoided).
Cover with the layer with urine earth and cattle dung  slurry.
Add 5 to 10 kg of super phosphate for every 10 tons of  organic wastes.
Repeat the process of putting such layers till the pit is  full.
Close the pit with urine earth, waste fodder and then heap  the soil till it gets convex shape (about 1 to 1.5’ above the ground) so that  the rainwater rolls away.
After six months compost is ready to apply to the fields.
The pit can be filled up  if sufficient organic wastes are available. Otherwise a temporary partition can  be made in the pit with bamboos or stalks and the pit can be filled up over  time filling each partitioned area as and when the material is available for  composting.
Why super phosphate is  added in the compost?
Due to quick heating and drying during the decomposition of organic  wastes, nitrogen in the organic wastes will be lost due to volatilization.  Addition of super phosphate decreases such nitrogen losses. It will also  increase the phosphate content of compost.
What is cow pat pit and how is it prepared?
Cow pat pit is an organic preparation,  which is prepared by mixing cow dung, egg shell powder, basalt rock and  biodynamic preparations in a desired proportion in brick-lined pits.
Are  there any leguminous plants, which could be used as green manures?
Number of crops such as peas,  glyricidia and dhaincha can be used for green manuring. These plants have to be  ploughed in the field when they are tender and before they start  flowering.
Can drip system be used to supply  liquid nutrients such as panchagavya as liquid fertilizer?
Yes, a number of farmers have already  been using the technique of using organic liquid fertilizers through drip  system.
Can we use coconut coir waste instead  of cow dung in preparing
vermi compost?
Coconut coir can be separately added  but cow dung is necessary for promoting population and also to meet the  essential microbial energy requirements of earthworms.
How  to manufacture turmeric formulation for spraying on my vegetable plants?
About 1 kg of turmeric tubers is soaked  in about 10 litres of cow’s urine overnight. Next day the turmeric tubers are  ground and mixed with 30 litres of water and sprayed.
What is fish
gunabajalam
and how  is it manufactured?
Fish
gunabajalam
is an organic  nutrient which is sprayed over the crops to increase the chlorophyll content.  It is manufactured by adding about 1 kg of fish waste (rotten fish can also be  added) and 1 kg of ghur (
Pannai vellam
in Tamil) in a plastic drum. It  is then allowed to remain for about 25 days, after which it is used as a spray  by diluting 100 ml of the solution in 10 litres of water. For details contact  Dr. G. Nammalvar, No 17/9, 5th cross, Srinivas nagar, Thiruannaikoil, Tiruchi-  620005, mobile: 9442531699.
Are  there any bio friendly methods to cure my curry leaf tree that has crinkled  leaves with white patches?
The tree may be sprayed with a  combination of neem oil, vermin wash and cow’s urine at weekly intervals  especially during summer for effective results.
Is there any method for making organic  hormones apart from vermiwash for inducing good crop growth?
Mix about 5ml of coconut milk and  buttermilk each in a mud pot and bury the pot under the soil for a period of 10  days for fermentation. After t
h
e stipulated time the fermented concoction  should be distilled and diluted in water in the ratio of 1:10 and sprayed over  the crops.
Is there any place near Chennai where I  can undergo training in growing spirulina?
Contact Oferr, Nallayan Research Centre  for Sustainable Development, Navallor village, Kanchipuram district, Tamil  Nadu, email: oferr@eth.net, phone: 044-28193063(office).
Where  can I obtain information on effective utilisation of kitchen wastes?
Contact Mr. G. Vasudeo, Secretary,  Vivekananda Kendra-National Resources Development Project (VK-NARDEP),  Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu 629-702, email: ngc_vknardep@sancharnet.in, phone:  04652-246296 for your query.
What is
Varahagunabajalam
? What  is it used for and is there any place from where I can get training in its  usage?
Varahagunabajalam
is made from the flesh and bones of pigs. About 5kg of pigs  flesh and bones, 1 kg of black gram and sesame each are fried in about 2 lts of  gingelley oil. About 2 kg of jaggery is added to the mixture and soaked in  cow’s urine or water and buried under soil for about 30 days. It helps in  better flower formation and fruits. The recommended dosage is 100 ml diluted in  10 litres of water, which can be either sprayed on the leaves or mixed together  with irrigated water. For training you can contact Raasi Organic Farms, mobile:  98655-82142, phone: 04565-284937.
How is compost from coconut-pith  prepared?
Pithplus is an effective fungal culture  which is added to the coirpith to compost it.
Where is spirulina produced in India?
Spirulina is produced by major and  minor companies of India including Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra  Pradesh.
Do leguminous plants help in  cultivation of other crops?
Leguminous plants in association with  the bacteria in their root nodules, can fix atmospheric nitrogen in the soil.  The increased nitrogen in the soil will help in the growth of succeeding crops.
When compost is ready?
The compost is ready when the material is moderately loose and crumbly and the  colour of the compost is dark brown. It will be black, granular, lightweight  and humus-rich. To facilitate separating the worms from the compost, stop  watering two to three days before emptying the beds. This will force about 80  per cent of the worms to the bottom of the bed. The rest of the worms can be  removed by hand, and are ready to be transferred into the next round of compost  making. The vermicompost is then ready for application. The smell is earth-like. Any bad odour is a sign that fermentation has not  reached its final goal and that the bacterial processes are still going on.
Are organic yields lower?
Based on 154 growing seasons' worth of  data on various crops, organic crops yielded 95% of crops grown under  conventional, high-input conditions. Growers who go through the 3-year  transition period from conventional to organic management usually experience an  initial decrease in yields, until soil microbes are re-established and nutrient  cycling is in place, at which point yields return to previous levels.
How do organic farmers  fertilize crops and control pests, diseases, and weeds?
Organic farmers build healthy soils by  nourishing the living component of the soil, the microbial inhabitants that  release, transform, and transfer nutrients. Soil organic matter contributes to  good soil structure and water-holding capacity. Organic farmers feed soil biota  and build soil structure and water-holding capacity. Organic farmers build soil  organic matter with cover crops, compost, and biologically based soil  amendments. These produce healthy plants that are better able to resist disease  and insect predation. Organic farmers' primary strategy in controlling pests  and diseases is prevention through good plant nutrition and management. Organic  farmers use cover crops and sophisticated crop rotations to manage the field  ecology, effectively disrupting habitat for weeds, insects, and disease  organisms.
Weeds are controlled through crop rotation, mechanical tillage, and  hand-weeding, as well as through cover crops, mulches, flame weeding, and other  management methods. Organic farmers rely on a diverse population of soil  organisms, beneficial insects, and birds to keep pests in check. When pest  populations get out of balance, growers implement a variety of strategies such  as the use of insect predators, mating disruption, traps and barriers. Under  the National Organic Program Rule, growers are required to use sanitation and  cultural practices first before they can resort to applying a material to  control a weed, pest or disease problem. Use of these materials in organic  production is regulated, strictly monitored, and documented. As a last resort,  certain botanical or other non-synthetic pesticides may be applied.
How are organic livestock  and poultry raised?
Organic meat, dairy products, and eggs  are produced from animals that are fed organic feed and allowed access to the  outdoors. They must be kept in living conditions that accommodate the natural  behavior of the animals. Ruminants must have access to pasture. Organic  livestock and poultry may not be give antibiotics, hormones, or medications in  the absence of illness; however, they may be vaccinated against disease.  Parasiticide use is strictly regulated. Livestock diseases and parasites are  controlled primarily through preventative measures such as rotational grazing,  balanced diet, sanitary housing, and stress reduction.
Is  organic food safe?
Yes. Organic food is as safe to consume  as any other kind of food. Just as with any kind of produce, consumers should  wash before consuming to ensure maximum cleanliness. As cited above, organic  produce contains significantly lower levels of pesticide residues than  conventional produce. It is a common misconception that organic food could be  at greater risk of
E. coli
contamination because of raw manure  application although conventional farmers commonly apply tons of raw manure as  well with no regulation whatsoever. Organic standards set strict guidelines on  manure use in organic farming: either it must be first composted, or it must be  applied at least 90 days before harvest, which allows ample time for microbial  breakdown of pathogens.
Is organic food more  nutritious than conventional food?
The definitive study has not been done,  mainly because of the multitude of variables involved in making a fair  comparison between organically grown and conventionally grown food. These  include crop variety, time after harvest, post-harvest handling, and even soil  type and climate, which can have significant effects on nutritional quality.  However, a 2002 report indicates that organic food is far less likely to  contain pesticide residues than conventional food (13% of organic produce  samples vs. 71% of conventional produce samples contained a pesticide residue,  when long-banned persistent pesticides were excluded).
What is composting?
Composting is a natural process, and when carried out under controlled  conditions, converts organic material (like food scraps and garden waste) into  a product called compost. During composting, various microorganisms, including  bacteria and fungi, break down organic material.
Why should I compost?
Although organic waste may not seem harmful - it actually represents more than  30% of all the material sent to landfill sites. When organic material is held  in a landfill, it produces harmful gases. In addition, as water runs through  this decomposing waste, toxic liquid runs out the bottom.
What are the benefits of composting?
Composting can play an important role in solid waste management programs and  greatly reduce the amount of waste going to landfill. In addition, composting  conserves resources, reduces pollution, reduces landfill and waste disposal  costs, and builds healthy soil.
What can and cannot be composted?
What's in
- fruits and vegetables, baked goods, rice and other grains,  dried corn stalks, pasta, peanut shells, coffee grounds and filters, tea leaves  and bags, egg shells, paper towels, egg cartons, toilet paper rolls, cereal  boxes, dry leaves, dried and untreated grass clippings, weeds, twigs, small  branches, sawdust, plants (non-diseased), and grass clippings.
What's out
- all meat and fish products, bones, fat and oils, all  dairy products, weeds that have gone to seed, diseased plants, dog and cat  waste, and plants previously sprayed with non-degradable pesticides.
What are brown and green materials?
Your compost pile requires both carbon and nitrogen to work properly. Brown  materials supply carbon and they include things like dry leaves, woodchips, dry  grass, and paper products. Green materials provide nitrogen and include things  like fruits and vegetables, coffee grounds, tea bags, and fresh grass  clippings.
Where should I put my backyard  composter?
The composter should be placed in a partially sunny, well drained, and  convenient area.
How do I start composting?
Step 1
:
Decide on a compost bin    and location
Step 2
:
Build your compost    pile. Start by layering brown and green materials. Begin with a layer of    browns, then add a layer of greens, finish by covering with a layer of browns    ensuring that the materials are fairly evenly balanced by weight, not volume.    As you add to the pile throughout the season, continue alternating layers of    browns and greens, always finishing with a layer of browns on top
Step 3
:
Sprinkle with water (if    necessary)
Step 4
:
Add a couple of shovels    of soil, and mix everything together
Step 5
:
As you add new compost    material, turn the compost by moving material from the outside to the centre,    and from the bottom to the top and vice-versa
How long does the composting process  take?
The composting process can take from two months to two years, depending on the  type of composter, the ingredients, and the amount of effort you put into  turning the pile. Compost is ready to use when it looks dark and crumbly and  none of the original ingredients are visible. A simple way to test if compost  is finished is to seal a small sample in a plastic bag for 24 to 48 hours. If  no strong odours are released when you open the bag, the compost is done.
Can I compost in the winter?
Composting doesn’t have to stop when the weather gets cold, in fact, you can  compost successfully all year long.
Although decomposition will slow down  during the winter months – those hard-working microbes are dormant when the  internal temperature is less than 10 °C – decomposition will speed up  again in the spring.  Even if your compost pile freezes altogether, you  can continue adding material throughout the winter that will break down when  the temperature rises
What should I do if my compost starts  to smell?
If your compost pile emits strong odours, it may not be getting enough air  and/or is getting too much water. To fix smelly compost add some brown  material, mix in some healthy garden soil, aerate the pile, then top it off  with a layer of brown material.
How do I keep pests out of my compost?
To help keep pests out of an open pile,  turn food scraps into the pile as you add them, covering them with yard  trimmings. Make or buy a bin that is pest resistant: one that has a lid &  has air holes small enough to keep out small pests.
Should I put my compost in the sun or  shade?
It's best in the shade because the  compost is less likely to dry out: dry compost does not decay.
How long does it take to compost?
Depending on how carefully you manage  your pile for the correct conditions, composting takes from 1 month to 2 years.
A pile turned every week or so and  carefully managed for all the right conditions may compost in a month or two.
A pile not turned or managed will take  about six months to two years to fully compost.
It is not essential to compost quickly. It's really up to you if you want  compost for your
garden as soon as possible or if you'd  rather wait for nature to run its course. Just be sure to compost responsibly  and turn your pile if it starts to give off foul odors.
Do I need to shred or grind organic  materials to compost them?
Shredding or grinding organic materials  helps speed composting by increasing the surface areaof the compostables,  making them accessible to decomposers. But shredding is not essential,  except when adding woody materials such as sticks that will take years to  decompose unless they areshredded.
Should I add inoculants and  activators/accelerators?
Inoculants and activators are not  recommended. Inoculants are microscopic decomposers, and they are naturally  found in the source materials you add to your pile, such as leaves and grass.  They are abundant in soil, finished compost, and manures. Just 1 teaspoon of  fertile soil with compost regularly added to it has 100 million bacteria and  400-800 feet of fungal threads.
Accelerators are generally a quick fix  of nitrogen that won't last long and are a potential source of water pollution  as they are easily washed out of your pile into surface and ground water. If  you need to add high nitrogen "greens" to your pile, organic sources  like grass clippings, manure, foodscraps or even bone meal give a slow release  of nitrogen and are better for composting.
Should I add lime to my pile?
1. Do not add lime to a pile because it  may cause nitrogen to be released from the pile as ammonia gas. This gas smells  bad and leaves your compost with less nitrogen, an important plant nutrient for  your garden.
2. You don't need to worry about the pH  of a compost pile. pH, being a measurement of alkalinity or acidity, will  generally adjust itself and, when compost is mature, the pH is usually around  neutral.
3. If you need to adjust the pH of  compost, do this after it has completed its composting. First test the pH of  your finished compost and adjust it as needed.
Is compost different from soil?
Compost is made up of organic matter,  microbes and nutrients that can be used to condition and fertilize flowerbeds  and vegetable gardens.
Compost is a valuable soil booster. It  has a high organic matter content and helps return to the soil many properties  that are lost over time and with use.
Compost contains micronutrients that  improve plant growth. It acts as a "slow-release" fertilizer. Compost  also improves the water-holding capacity of your soil.  So not only does  compost help you conserve water, it helps keep your water bill down during the  summer months.
What  are the benefits of composting?
The City benefits
You benefit
Benefits of using compost
encourages Calgarians to recycle their food and yard waste
reduces greenhouse gases
extends life of our landfills
provides another way to reach our 80/20 by 2020 goal.
easy and fun way to get the whole family to take part in    an environmentally friendly solution
cuts your weekly garbage almost in half
recycles a valuable natural resource rather than burying    it in a landfill
produces free compost for your gardens.
helps break up heavy clay soils
adds essential nutrients to the soil
helps soil hold water better
discourages weeds
helps gardens and lawns become less dependent on    chemicals.
What can I compost?
Yard waste such as grass clippings,  fallen leaves, weeds before they go to seed, tree fruit and berries and the  remains of disease-free garden plants make excellent compost.  You can  also compost kitchen scraps such as fruit and vegetable peels and trimmings,  eggshells, teabags, coffee grounds and filters.  Woody yard waste like  branches and brush can be used as well in limited amounts as long as they are  cut into smaller pieces.
Do NOT compost meat, bones, grease, fat  or fatty foods like cheese, salad dressing or leftover cooking oil, as they may  attract pests or contribute to odour problems.
Compost
DO NOT Compost
Grass clippings and weeds
Meat, bones or fish scraps
Leaves and garden waste
Grease, fats and oils
Tree fruit, berries and evergreen    needles
Dairy products
Branches, hedge clippings, bark    chips, (smaller pieces)
Cooked and prepared foods
Dryer/vacuum lint
Baked goods, rice or grains
Topsoil and sod
Pet manure or animal parts and    remains
Fruit and vegetable waste
Charcoal or coal ashes
Teabags, coffee grounds, coffee    filters and paper towels
Clay, gravel or rocks
Eggshells
Materials treated with    insecticides, herbicides or other chemicals
How do I compost?
Composting requires five basic things
Organic material
Moisture
Air
Soil microbes
Lime
Organic material is divided in to  "Greens" (nitrogen rich) and "Browns" (carbon rich). Green  materials are usually moist like your fruit and veggie scraps, fresh grass  clippings or fresh fallen leaves. Brown materials are dried like dry brown  leaves or dry grass clippings.
Follow these basic steps for more  effective composting
Step 1
Choose an area with good drainage and    some sun to set up or build your own composter. Depending on your lifestyle    and needs, you may choose to use a store-bought or home-made composter. View    our Backyard Composter area for information about the different kinds of bins    available.  Ideally, your compost area should be at least one metre by    one metre by one metre.  You do need a fairly large pile for the composting    process to begin.  If your pile is too small, it will not compost    properly.
Step 2
When you begin, you may choose to    layer some branches or twigs about one foot long or larger on the bottom of    your compost pile to allow for air flow and drainage. A thin layer of soil    can be added first to provide the soil microbes that will do the work of    breaking down your organic material. There is no need to use compost starter,    which basically does the same thing by adding soil microbes.
Then begin to add your materials as    you have them. The smaller the pieces you put into your compost heap, the    faster they will decompose. You will need to add one-part greens for every    part of browns to build a balanced compost heap. It is recommended by some    that you layer your greens and browns.  However, as long as the ratio is    one-part green materials to one- part brown materials, it is not necessary to    layer the material as you will be turning the pile mixing these two types of    materials anyhow.
Fine materials such as grass    clippings should be added in smaller amounts so that they do not compact.    Compaction means that there won't be adequate air supply. You can also try    "grasscycling." See our Grasscycling area for more information.
Step 3
Add water.  Effective composting    requires moisture. Add water when you first start your compost pile and each    time you turn your pile. The compost pile should be as moist as a wrung out    sponge to be composting effectively.
Step 4
Turn your pile with a compost    aerating tool, pitchfork or shovel every couple of weeks during the growing    season to provide an adequate air supply.
If your compost pile has a foul    odour, it is likely you need to turn the pile more often to circulate more    air, reduce watering or reduce the amount of greens in your pile.
You will know that your compost pile    is working when the material starts to heat up. The pile can get so hot at    its centre that you couldn't stand to put your hand there.
In the winter, your compost pile may    freeze solidly. Just keep adding your green and brown material as usual. In    the spring, when it thaws, the pile will pick up the composting process just    where it left off the previous winter. Only really large compost piles are    insulated enough to continue composting year-round.
Step 5
Your composted material is ready to    use when it has an "earthy" smell, is dark in colour, cold and most    of the materials are unrecognizable. The composting process can take from two    months to two years, depending on the materials used and the effort involved.
What are the signs that I'm not  composting properly?
Composting is not difficult but  sometimes the process requires a little extra attention. Here are some easy  solutions to correct certain situations that might occur.
The composting process takes too long
– If the pile does not decrease in size or generate heat,  composting may need a boost. If the pile is dry, add water and mix thoroughly.  If the pile is wet and muddy, spread it in the sun and add dry material. As  well, the items in the pile may be too large. Chop them into smaller pieces.  Remember to save "old" compost to mix with incoming material.
The centre of the compost pile is damp, but the rest dry
– The compost pile may be too small. Try to keep your  composter as full as possible. Mix new with old, dry with wet, breaking up mats  and clumps.
The compost pile is damp and sweet smelling but not heating
– The pile may need more greens (nitrogen). Add grass  clippings, fruit or veggie scraps or a sprinkling of organic fertilizer from  the garden centre.
The compost pile smells like ammonia
– The pile may have too many greens, add more browns  (carbon). This will likely happen if you have added too many fresh grass  clippings.
The compost pile smells like sulphur (rotten eggs)
– The pile may be too wet and not be getting enough air.  Loosen up the pile, break up clumps, unblock vents and perhaps add some wood  chips to help the pile "breathe." Turning the pile always helps  aeration.
The compost pile is attracting pests
– Compost in a container with a cover to prevent animals  from getting into the composting materials. A wire mesh around the base can  help to prevent pests from digging under the pile. Dig in or cover food waste  immediately. If done properly, composting should not attract pests.
Why the pr
oduction of spirulina,  isn’t it too complicated?
Technically, production of spirulina is  much easier than production of rice for example. The problem is not really  complexity, but rather newness. Depending on the education level, a training  between one week to one month is necessary (much shorter than the years of  training for classical agricultural techniques).
Are the ingredients easy to find  locally?
The culture of spirulina requires a  single ingredient which is not a classical agricultural fertilizer: sodium bicarbonate.  This product, however, is very common because it is used for animal nutrition  and in other areas. In addition, it is possible to replace it by ashes of wood.
Regarding to the other ingredients,  they are sources of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium, which are common in  agriculture
What about the acceptability of  spirulina by the populations, and more specifically by children?
In contrast to the usual apprehension,  the experience is that spirulina (at the low doses recommended) is accepted  without any problem by those who need it. In fact, the young children like it  usually so much that they “devour” all spirulina left around.
Why not burn leaves and other yard  wastes?
Burning leaves and other yard wastes  pollutes the air and can lead to uncontrolled fires. Leaf smoke can make  breathing difficult for people who suffer from asthma, emphysema, chronic  bronchitis, or allergies. A number of states currently ban leaf burning, and  some communities either ban leaf burning or restrict when and where it can take  place.
Why not put yard wastes in landfills?
Since these materials are relatively  clean and biodegradable, disposal in landfills may be unnecessary and wastes  space. In addition, as yard wastes decompose in landfills, they generate  methane gas and acidic leachate. Methane is a colorless, explosive greenhouse  gas that is released as bacteria decompose organic materials in landfills. If  methane is not controlled at a landfill, it can seep underground and into  nearby buildings, where it has the potential to explode. Yard wastes also  contribute acidity that can make other waste constituents more mobile and  therefore more toxic.
How does compost improve the soil?
Compost does several things to benefit  the soil that synthetic fertilizers cannot do. First, it adds organic matter,  which improves the way water interacts with the soil. In sandy soils, compost  acts as a sponge to help retain water in the soil that would otherwise drain  down below the reach of plant roots (in this way, it protects plants against drought).  In clay soils, compost helps to add porosity (tiny holes and passageways) to  the soil, making it drain more quickly so that it doesn't stay waterlogged and  doesn't dry out into a bricklike substance. Compost also inoculates the soil  with vast numbers of beneficial microbes (bacteria, fungi, etc.) and the  habitat that the microbes need to live. These microbes are able to extract  nutrients from the mineral part of the soil and eventually pass the nutrients  on to plants.
Source
http://www.icrisat.org/vasat/learning_resources/OrganicFAQs/organic_farming.htm
www.mycorrhizae.com
www.hortsorb.com
http://kendujhar.nic.in/
http://www.greenpeace.org
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2009-16