Home | Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare | MoA & FW | Government of India, India
कृषि एवं किसान कल्याण विभाग
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
कृषि एवं किसान कल्याण मंत्रालय
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
होम
मुख्य विषयवस्तु पर जाएं
A-
A
A+
स्क्रींन रीडर सुलभत
भाषा चुनें-
Hindi
English
कृषि एवं किसान कल्याण विभाग
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
भारत सरकार
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
कृषि एवं किसान कल्याण मंत्रालय
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
Millets: Seeds of Change
हमारे बारे में
संगठन सेटअप
माननीय मंत्रियों
मंत्री कार्यालय
कौन क्या है
विभाग एक नजर में
इतिहास
संपर्क अधिकारी
प्रभाग
अधिनियम एवं नियम
दस्तावेज़
समझौता ज्ञापन
बजट, वित्त एवं लेखा
आउटकम बजट
अनुदान की मांग
पीएओ/सीडीडीओ/एनसीडीडीओ की निर्देशिका
खाते एक नजर में
रिपोर्ट और प्रकाशन
जी20 प्रेसीडेंसी सूचना नोट
वार्षिक रिपोर्ट
अन्य
सिटीजन चार्टर
फार्म डाउनलोड
परिणाम फ्रेमवर्क विकास(आरएफडी)
प्रस्तुतियाँ
परिपत्र / सूचनाएँ
किसान कल्याण प्रभाग
प्लांट का संरक्षण
जैव उत्तेजक
कृषि आकस्मिकता योजना
प्रस्तुति का माध्यम
कार्य आवंटन की हैंडबुक
फसल मौसम निगरानी समूह
सीडब्ल्यूडब्ल्यूजी डेटा
जलाशय
वर्षा
फसल की स्थिति
सीडब्ल्यूडब्ल्यूजी मिनट
संग्रहालय
सांख्यिकी
कृषि
कृषि सांख्यिकी एक नज़र
न्यूनतम समर्थन मूल्य (एमएसपी)
अनुमान
बागवानी
वार्षिक रिलीज़ कैलेंडर (ARC)
राष्ट्रीय मेटाडेटा संरचना (एनएमडीएस)
अनुमान
राज्य स्तर
प्रकाशन
रिपोर्ट
मैप
यूपीएजी
योजनाएं
योजनाएं और दिशानिर्देश
किसान कल्याण योजनाएं
मंत्रालय की प्रमुख योजनाएं
दिशानिर्देश
मार्केट इंटेलिजेंस रिपोर्ट
कमोडिटी मार्केट इंटेलिजेंस रिपोर्ट
डैशबोर्ड
कृषि मैपर डैशबोर्ड
यूपीएजी
एसीएबीसी
एआईएफ
आरकेवीवाई
एसएचसी
भर्ती
भर्ती
प्रशिक्षण
मीडिया
राष्ट्रीय रबी सम्मेलन 2025
सम्मेलन
गैलरी
स्वच्छता सन्देश
ई-पत्रिका
नया क्या है
फोटो गैलरी
ऑडियो और वीडियो
नई पहल
सम्मेलन
निविदा
रुचि की अभिव्यक्ति
सम्बंधित लिंक्स
कृषि अनुसंधान और शिक्षा विभाग
एफएओ
आईसीआरआईएसएटी
आईएमडी
ऍम किसान
भारत के कृषि कौशल परिषद
कृषि सूचना पोर्टल
संसदीय प्रश्न
लोक सभा
राज्य सभा
एआईएफ
कृषि-निवेश
डीबीटी एग्रीकल्चर
इंडो-जर्मन एएमडी प्रोजेक्ट
अर्थशास्त्र और सांख्यिकी निदेशालय
कृषि लागत और मूल्य आयोग (सी.ऐ.सी.पि)
यूपीएजी
डीजीसीईएस
जल शक्ति अभियान
डीपीआई
एग्रीस्टैक
मंत्रालय पत्र संग्रह
डाउनलोड
Home
Website Policies
Website Policies
1.Copyright Policy
Material featured on this Website may be reproduced free of charge after taking proper permission by sending a mail to us. However, the material has to be reproduced accurately and not to be used in a derogatory manner or in a misleading context. Wherever the material is being published or issued to others, the source must be prominently acknowledged. However, the permission to reproduce this material shall not extend to any material which is identified as being copyright of a third party. Authorisation to reproduce such material must be obtained from the departments/copyright holders concerned.
These terms and conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Indian Laws. Any dispute arising under these terms and conditions shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of India.
2.Hyperlinking Policy
Links to external websites/portals
At many places in this Website, you shall find links to other websites/portals. This links have been placed for your convenience. [Department] is not responsible for the contents and reliability of the linked websites and does not necessarily endorse the views expressed in them. Mere presence of the link or its listing on this website should not be assumed as endorsement of any kind. We can not guarantee that these links will work all the time and we have no control over availability of linked pages.
Links to our website by other websites
We do not object to you linking directly to the information that is hosted on this website and no prior permission is required for the same. However, we would like you to inform us about any links provided to this website so that you can be informed of any changes or updation therein. Also, we do not permit our pages to be loaded into frames on your site. The pages belonging to this website must load into a newly opened browser window of the User.
3.Privacy Policy
This website does not automatically capture any specific personal information from you, (like name, phone number or e-mail address), that allows us to identify you individually.
Wherever the Website requests you to provide personal information, you will be informed for the particular purposes for which the information is gathered and adequate security measures will be taken to protect your personal information.
We do not sell or share any personally identifiable information volunteered on the website site to any third party (public/private). Any information provided to this Website will be protected from loss, misuse, unauthorized access or disclosure, alteration, or destruction.
We gather certain information about the User, such as Internet protocol (IP) addresses, domain name, browser type, operating system, the date and time of the visit and the pages visited. We make no attempt to link these addresses with the identity of individuals visiting our site unless an attempt to damage the site has been detected.
4.Terms of use
This website is designed, developed and maintained by  DAD/IT, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi and content provided by Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India.
Though all efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy and currency of the content on this website, the same should not be construed as a statement of law or used for any legal purposes. Incase of any ambiguity or doubts, users are advised to verify / check with the Department(s) and / or other source(s), and to obtain appropriate professional advice.
Under no circumstances will this Department be liable for any expense, loss or damage including, without limitation, indirect or consequential loss or damage, or any expense, loss or damage whatsoever arising from use, or loss of use, of data, arising out of or in connection with the use of this website.
These terms and conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the Indian Laws. Any dispute arising under these terms and conditions shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of India.
The information posted on this website could include hypertext links or pointers to information created and maintained by non-Government / private organisations.
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is providing these links and pointers solely for your information and convenience. When you select a link to an outside website, you are leaving the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare website and are subject to the privacy and security policies of the owners / sponsors of the outside website.
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare does not guarantee the availability of such linked pages at all times.
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare cannot authorise the use of copyrighted materials contained in linked websites. Users are advised to request such authorisation from the owner of the linked website.
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare does not guarantee that linked websites comply with Indian Government Web Guidelines.
5.Site Security
For site security purposes and to ensure that this service remains available to all users, this government computer system employs commercial software programs to monitor
network traffic to identify unauthorized attempts to upload or change information, or otherwise cause damage.
Except for authorized law enforcement investigations, no other attempts are made to identify individual users or their usage habits. Raw data logs are used for no other purposes and are scheduled for regular deletion.
Unauthorized attempts to upload information or change information on this service are strictly prohibited and may be punishable under the Indian IT Act (2000).
6.Disclaimer
This web site is brought to you by the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. Precautions have been taken to depict factual status but the possibility of stray errors cannot be ruled out. The information is subject to change from time to time and is not to be used for legal purposes.
While surfing through this site you will come across directories and links to Government and Private Organizations. The contents of these sites are not to be construed as a responsibility of or endorsement by the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and are owned by the respective organizations which may be contacted for any further information or suggestion.
Publish Date :16-10-2022
RTI
Terms & Condition
Website Policies
Help
Feedback
Web Information Manager
Tenders
Recruitments
Contact Us
Sitemap
For more information about the MoAFW, please contact at:
us-it[at]gov[dot]in
Website Content Owned & Managed by Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare | MoA & FW | Government of India, India
Designed and Developed by DAD/IT, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi, India.
Last Updated On: 17 Jun 2026
Visitors: