Glossary :: S
Saline Soil
A  soil containing excess of natural soluble salts to impair soil and crop  productivity and has pH value of 8.5, EC 4 mmhos per cm at 25 degree C and ESP  15 per cent.
Scion
A  bud or branch cut for grafting or planting.
Section
A surveyed parcel of land containing 640 acres one square  mile.
Seedstock
Pedigreed  or well-bred livestock which is maintained for breeding purposes. A specially  selected strain of plants or seeds which are to be used as parents for future  generations.
Silage
A  crop that has been preserved in a moist, succulent condition by partial  fermentation in a tight container (silo) above or below ground. The chief crops  stored in this way are corn (the whole plant), sorghum, and various legumes and  grasses. The main use of silage is in cattle feed.
Sire
The male parent.
Sorghum
A cereal grass used mainly for feedgrain  or silage.
Sow
A sexually mature female hog, after  having her first litter.
Soybeans
A  legume crop, native to the Orient, used mainly in the United States for high  protein feed and oil.
Specific Humidity
Specific Humidity is the  weight of water vapour per unit weight of air
(including water vapour)
Stag
A male bovine castrated after  puberty.
Stallion
An unaltered (uncastrated) male  horse.
Stand
A  recognizable area of plants that is relatively homogeneous and can be managed  as a single unit.
Steer
A male bovine castrated early in  life, usually as a calf.
Stockers (or stocker cattle)
Heifers and/or steers that are  being grown on pasture or other forage for later sale as feedlot replacements.
Secondary tillage
The  tillage operations following primary tillage to create a good seed bed for  proper seeding/planting.
Selective herbicide
It is that which is more  toxic to one plant, some may be killed and others may be affected only slightly  or not at all.
Sequence cropping
Â
In this system,  harvesting of the first crop is followed by the planting of the second crop,  after fresh land preparation. Sequence cropping is adopted when water resources  are adequately available till the maturing of the crop that is grown after the  first crop. Sequence crops that are ideal after rice are mustard, pulses,  maize, tomato, groundnut and vegetables.
Shelter belt
It  is a belt of trees and shrubs intended to protect field crop from wind and to  conserve soil moisture. A good shelterbelt reduces wind velocity on the  windward side from 5 to 10 times the height of the trees and on the leeward  side from 10-30 times its height. Trees about 50 feet in height would protect  an area approximately 400 m in width. The shelterbelt should consist of several  rows of trees and trees of varying heights. A high row of shrubs on the  windward side can provide a dense barrier to the wind. This arrangement ensures  that the foliage of the shelterbelt lifts the wind well above ground level and  gradually drops it downward on the other side of the shelterbelt. To have  protection from the wind at all seasons both evergreen and deciduous trees are  included in the shelterbelt.
Silage
Animal  feed resulting from the storage and fermentation of green or wet crop under  anaerobic conditions.
Silvihorticulture
Care  and cultivation of small plots (gardens) devoted primarily to vegetables and fruits,  including woody species.
Smothering
Those  crops which are through their thick canopy exclude light and prevent all top  growth of weeds.
Sodium adsorption ratio (SAR)
A  ratio for soil extracts and irrigation waters used to express the relative  activity of sodium ions in exchange reactions with soil.
Soil moisture tension
It  is the force with which water held by soil against gravity. It is generally  expressed in mm of mercury.
Sole cropping
Â
Growing one crop variety  in a pure stand.
Stratification
A method of breaking  seed dormancy in which the imbibed seed are subjected to a period of chilling  to after ripen the embryo.
Strip cropping
Â
Growing soil conserving and soil depleting crops in alternate strips  running perpendicular to the slope strips wide enough to permit independent  cultivation but narrow enough for the crop to interact agronomically.
Stubble mulching
String  the soil with implements that leaves considerable part of the vegetative  material or crop residues or vegetable litter on the surface as a protection  against erosion and for conserving moisture by favouring infiltration and  reducing evaporation.
Substitution farming
Â
It is farming  enterprise, which provides food and commodities just sufficient for the farming  family, and there is no surplus to sell.
Sustainable agriculture
Â
Management of resources  for agriculture to satisfy changing human needs, while maintaining or enhancing  the quality of the environment and conserving the natural resources.
Systematic herbicide
Â
A herbicide which is  translocated within the plants.