Stress Management :: Temperature
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Stress Management  :: Temperature
About Temperature Stress
Temperature stress includes both high temperature and low  temperature stresses.
1. Low temperature
2. High   temperature
LOW TEMPERATURE STRESS
Classification of  plants - Response to Low Temperature
Chilling sensitive  plants
: Seriously injured by temperature above 00C, below 150C
Chilling resistant  Plants:
(i) Able to tolerate low temperature
(ii) Seriously injured when ice start to  form in tissues
Frost Resistant Plants
:
tolerate exposure to very low temperatures(-500C to -1000C)  even when immersed in liquid N2.
Chilling injury
Occurs at Low temperature but nonfreezing  temperatures
Chilling  injury occurs in
Tropical and subtropical plants at100C  to 250C
Temperate plants at 0 to 150C
Chilling  Effect is manifested by physiological and cytological changes
Cytological  changes may be reversible or irreversible depending upon time of exposure to  low temperature
Symptoms of chilling injury include
Cellular changes :
Changes in membrane structure and composition, decreased protoplasmic       streaming, electrolyte leakage and plasmolysis.
Altered metabolism       :
Increased or reduced respiration, depending on severity of stress,       production of abnormal metabolites due to anaerobic condition.
Common Symptoms
Reduced plant growth and death
Surface lesions on        leaves and fruits
Abnormal curling,        lobbing and crinkling of leaves
Water soaking of        tissues
Cracking, splitting        and dieback of stems
Internal        discolouration (vascular browning)
Increased        susceptibility to decay
Failure to ripen        normally
Loss of vigour        (potato lose the ability to sprout if chilled)
Some of the more common symptoms of chilling stress are
Rapid wilting followed by water soaked patches  which develop into sunken pits that reflect cells tissue collapse. Following  warming, the sunken pits usually dry up, leaving necrotic patches of tissues on  the leaf surface.
Chilling symptoms in fruits vary and include
Sunken pits in        cucumber
Browning of sp        skins and degradation of pulp tissue in banana
Blackheart of pine        apple (Wilson,        1987)
Cellular Membranes
The  first symptom of chilling injury is the phase transition from liquid crytalline  phase to solid gel state
Increase  in permeability of plasmalemma results in leakage of organic and inorganic  substances
Plasmolysis: Plasmolemma- pressed against the  tonoplast and deleted into the vacuole as sac like intrusions
Formation of crystalline deposits in root cells,  epidermal, mesophyll and vascular cells of leaves -leading to tonoplast  disruption.
Tonoplast injury is irrevesible
During hardening at low or above zero temp the  lipid bodies accumulate in cytoplasm in close association with plasmalemma.
Lipid  composition
Ratio of Unsaturated to saturated fatty acids is  higher in chilling resistant plants
Increase in activity of fatty acid de-saturases  was found in chilling resistant plants
Cytological Changes
Swelling of plastid membranes and mitochondrial  membranes
Swelling of chloroplast thylakoids
Decrease in size and no. of starch grains
Grana disintegration and increase in size and  no.of plastoglobules
Mitochondria with reduced cristae and  transparent matrix
Mitochondria – double the volume
Extensive dilation and vesiculation of smooth ER  cisternae
Rough ER completely disappears
ie
.,Ribosomes  are lost from the membrane
Dilated Vesicular ER cisternae – Accumulation of  cryoprotective substances
Transformation of rough ER into vacuolated  smooth ER-represents early stage of chilling
Since ER-most dynamic structure-full  reversibility of ER ultrastructure is possible
Swelling of dictyosomes
Longer exposure to chilling-disintegration of  dictyosomes
Freezing Injury
Freezing injury in plants can be from two sources: 1.  Freezing of soil water, and; 2. Freezing of the fluids within the plant. The  soil water that is available to plants is found in the porous regions between  soil particles. It freezes at about -2°C, depriving the plant of its source of  water. Freezing of water within the plant is a more serious threat, as it can  cause disruption of structure and function of cells and tissues.
Freezing damage occurs  primarily due to the formation of ice crystals, which damage cell structure  when the temperature falls below 00C.
Ice  usually forms first in the cell walls and intercellular spaces
Damage  occurs when ice crystals grow and puncture into the cytoplasm
Physics of ice formation
For the transition to solid phase to take place,  need ice nucleation points
When becoming solid, ice gives off heat, so the  temperature rises
When all of the water in the cell wall has  frozen, then the temperature begins to drop again
Two types of freezing  occur in plant cells and tissues
Vitrification  : Solidification of the cellular content into   non-crystalline state (amorphous state) .It occurs by rapid freezing of  cells (decrease in temperature by more than 30C/ min) to a  very low temp.C
Crystallisation  / ice formation : Crystallisation of ice occur either extracellularly or  intracellularly (gradual cooling /drop in temperature)
Formation of ice  intracellularly may be due to
By       internal nucleation (certain large polysaccharides /proteins serve as       nucleating agents to form ice)
By       penetration of external ice crystals into the cells
Intracellular       ice formation is very lethal which causes immediate disruption of cells.
Many plants can avoid  freezing injury, because they allow deep super cooling
In plants, the temperature of water will drop  below its freezing temperature and will still remain liquid - supercooling
The liquid in the intercellular space never  makes the transition to solid phase, so ice crystals don't form
Some can supercool down to -350C
At -40C, ice crystal formation begins  spontaneously
Occurs in hardwoods and some fruit trees
When the ice crystals formed are very small due  to rapid freezing,  these crystals melt  before they reach a harmful size.
Intracellular Ice  Formation
Spreads from cell to cell through plasmadesmata
Formed in the cellwall adjacent to the  intercellular spaces
Originates spontaneously from centres of  nucleation in the cytoplasm.
Membrane changes
Intact cellular membranes act as effective barrier to the  propagation of ice. This depends upon temperature and cold hardening .Cellular  Membranes are more susceptible to freezing damage than soluble enzymes.  Plasmalemma is the major site of lethal injury. Leakage of ions from thawed  tissues occurs due to protoplasmic swelling and alteration in permeability to K+ions.
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2008-2024.