ORGANIC FARMING :: Frequently Asked Questions
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
ORGANIC FARMING :: Weed Management
Weed Management in Organic Farming
1. About organic weed management
2. Cultural method
3. Mechanical method
4. Thermal method
5. Biological method
1.
About organic weed management?
Farmers  have struggled with the presence of weeds in their fields since the beginning  of agriculture. Weeds can be considered a significant problem because they tend  to decrease crop yields by increasing competition for water, sunlight and  nutrients while serving as host plants for pests and diseases. Since the  invention of herbicides, farmers have used these chemicals to eradicate weeds  from their fields. Using herbicides not only increased crop yields but also  reduced the labor required to remove weeds. Today, some farmers have a renewed  interest in organic methods of managing weeds since the widespread use of  agro-chemicals has resulted in purported environment and health problems. It  has also been found that in some cases herbicides use can cause some weed  species to dominate fields because the weeds develop resistance to herbicides.  In addition, some herbicides are capable of destroying weeds that are harmless  to crops, resulting in a potential decrease in biodiversity on farmers. It is  important to understand that under an organic system of seed control, weeds  will never be eliminated but only managed.
Critical period of weed control
This  period has been defined as an interval in the life cycle of the crop when a  must be kept weed – free to prevent yield loss. If weeds have been controlled  throughout the critical period, the weeds that emerge later will not affect  yield and can be controlled prior to harvest with a harvest and to burn down  the weeds and desiccate the crop. Horticulture  crops are very sensitive to weed competition, and need to kept weed-free, from  planting, emergence or budbreak, until the end of their critical weed –free  period. If the crop is kept weed-free  for the critical period, generally no yield reduction would result. Again,  weeds emerging after the critical weed-free period will not affect yield, but  control efforts after this time may make harvest more efficient, or reduce weed  problems in subsequent years in perennial crops.
Critical Weed-free Period for Horticultural Crops
Crop
Critical    Weed-free Period
Apples, new plantings
During May and June
Apples, bearing
Budbreak until 30 days after bloom
Beets
2-4 weeks after emergence
Cabbage, early
3 weeks after planting
Carrots
3-6 weeks after emergence
Cucumbers, pickling
4 weeks after seeding
Lettuce
3 weeks after planting
Onions
The whole season
Potatoes
4 weeks after planting
Squash
Early plantings compete better
Strawberries, new
During May and June
Tomatoes, fresh
36 days after transplanting
Tomatoes, seeded
9 weeks after seeding
2.
Cultural Method
Crop rotation
Crop rotation involves alternating different crops in a  systematic sequence on the same land. It is an important strategy for  developing a sound long term weed control program. Weeds tend to thrive with  crops of similar growth requirements as their own and cultural practices  designed to contribute to the crop may also benefit the growth and development  of weeds. Monoculture, that is growing the same crop in the same field yea  after year, results in a build-up of weed species that are adapted to the  growing conditions of the crop. When diverse crops are used in a rotation, weed  germination and growth cycles are disrupted by variations in cultural practices  associated with each crop (tillage, planting dates, crop competition, etc).
Within a  rotation, crop choice will determine both the current and the potential future  weed problems that a grower will face. Traditionally, potato (
Solanum tuberosum
L.)  was included   in the rotation to reduce weed problems before a less competitive crop  was grown. For an organic grower, crop choice is complicated further by the  need to consider soil fertility levels within the cropping sequence and to  include fertility building  periods in  the rotation. Variations in crop and weed responses to soil nutrient levels can  also play an important part in weed management. The inclusion of a fallow  period in the rotation in known to reduce perennial weeds. It is best to  alternate legumes with grasses,  spring planted  crops with fall planted crops, row crops with close planted crops and heavy  feeders with light feeders.
Cover crops
Rapid  development and dense ground covering by the crop will suppress weeds. The  inclusion of cover crops such as rye, red, clover, buckwheat and oilseed radish  or over wintering crops like winter wheat or forages in the cropping system can  suppress weed growth. Highly competitive  crops may be grown as short duration 'smother' crops within the rotation.  Additionally, cover crop residues on the soil surface will suppress weeds by  shading and cooling the soil. When choosing a cover crop, consideration should  always be given to how the cover crop will affect the succeeding crop. In  addition, decomposing cover crop residues may release allelo chemicals that  inhibit the germination and development of weed seeds.
Intercropping
Intercropping involves growing a smother crop  between rows of the main crop. Intercrops are able to suppress weeds. However,  the use of intercropping as a strategy for seed control should be approached  carefully. The intercrops can greatly reduce the yields of the main crop if  competition for water or nutrients occurs.
Field Scouting
It  involves the systematic collection of weed and crop data from the field (weed  distribution, growth stage, population, crop stage etc).  The information is used, in the short term,  to make immediate weed management decisions to reduce or avoid economic crop  loss. In the long term, field scouting is important in evaluating the success  or failure of weed management programs and for making sound decisions in the  future.
Mulching
Mulching  or covering the soil surface can prevent weed seed germination by blocking  light transmission preventing seed germination. Allelopathic chemicals in the  mulch also can physically suppress seedling emergence. There are many forms of  mulches available. Listed are three common ones.
1. Living mulch
Living  mulch is usually a pant species that grows densely and low to the ground such  as clover. Living mulches can be planted before or after a crop is established.  It is important to kill ad till in, or manage living mulch so that it does not  compete with the actual crop. A living mulch of
Portulaca oleracea
from broadcast before transplanting broccoli  suppressed weeds without affecting crop yield. Often, the primary purpose of  living mulch is to improve soil structure, aid fertility or reduce pest  problems and weed suppression may be merely an added benefit.
2. Organic mulches
Such  materials as straw, bark, and composted material can provide effective weed  control. Producing the material on the farm is recommended since the cost of  purchased mulches can be prohibitive, depending on the amount needed to  suppress weed emergence. An effective but labor-intensive system uses newspaper  and straw. Two layers of newspaper are placed on the ground, followed by a  layer of hay. it is important to make sure the hay does not contain any weeds  seeds. Organic mulches have the advantage of being biodegradable. Cut rye grass  mulch spread between planted rows of tomatoes and peppers was more economic  than cultivation.
Fresh bark of conifers and oak as well as rapeseed straw gave  good control of weeds when they were laid as mulches under the trees in apples  orchards. Materials  such as black polyethylene have been used for weed control in a range of crops  in organic production systems. Plastic mulches have been developed that filter  out photosynthetically active radiation, but let through infrared light to warm  the soil. These infrared transmitting mulches have been shown to be effective  at controlling weeds.
Planting patterns
Crop  population, spatial arrangement, and the choice of cultivar (variety) can  affect weed growth. Fr example, studies have shown that narrow row widths and a  higher seeding density will reduce the biomass of later-emerging weeds by  reducing the amount of light available for weeds located below the crop canopy.  Similarly, fast growing cultivars can have a competitive edge over the weeds.
Variety selection
Careful  selection of crop varieties is essential to limit weeds and pathogen problems  and to satisfy market needs. Any crop variety that is able to quickly shade the  soil between the rows and is able to grow more rapidly than the weeds will have  an advantage.
Tillage system
Tillage  systems alter the soil seed bank dynamics and depth of burial of weed seeds.  Studies have found that almost 75% of the seedbank was concentrated in the  upper 5 cm of soil in no-till fields. In the moldboard plough system however,  the seedbank is more uniformly distributed over depth. Other conservation  tillage systems are intermediate to these two systems.
Weed  seedling emergence is often more uniform shallow buried weed seeds and may  result in better weed control. Weed seeds closer to the soil are more likely to  be eaten or damaged by insects, animals, other predators and disease causing  organisms.
Sanitation
It is  possible to prevent many new weeds from being introduced onto the farm and to  prevent existing weeds from producing large quantities of seed. The use of  clean seed, mowing  weeds around the  edges of fields or after harvest to prevent weeds from going to seed, and  thoroughly composting manure before application can greatly reduce the  introduction of weed seeds and difficult weed species. It is even possible to  selectively hand-eradicate isolated outbreaks of new weeds, effectively  avoiding future infestations. Planting clean, high-quality seed is essential to  crop success. Other sanitation factors to consider would include thorough  cleaning of any machinery which might have been used in weedy fields, and the  establishment of hedgerows to limit windblown seeds.
Nitrogen fertility
Nitrogen  fertilizer can affect the competition between crops and weeds and in the subsequent  crops. For example, nitrate is known to promote seed germination and seed  production in some weed species. Nitrogen fertilization may result in increased  weed growth instead of increased crop yield. Selective placement of nitrogen in  a band can favour the crop over the weed. Use of legume residues are opposed to  chemical nitrogen  fertilizer to  supplement nitrogen needs of the crop can enhance weed suppression. Legume  resules release nitrogen slowly with less stimulation of unwanted weed growth.
Feed the crop, not the weeds
Avoiding pre-plant broadcasting of soluble  nutrients  that may be more readily  utilized by fast-growing weeds than slow-growing crops, and may even stimulate  weed germination.
Applying fertilizer near the rows where it is  more likely to be captured by the crop.
Expensive bagged organic fertilizer, may be  applied low rates at planting or sidedress, relying on mid-season release of  nutrients from compost and / or green manures for primary fertility.
Water management
Effective  water management is key to controlling weeds in a vegetable operation. There  are a number of ways that careful irrigation management can help you reduce  weed pressure on your crops:
Pre-germination of weeds
In pre-germination irrigation or rainfall germinates weed  seeds just before the cash crop is planted. The newly germinated weeds can be  killed by light cultivation or flaming. Pre-germination should occur as close a  possible to the date of planting to ensure that changes in weather  conditions do not have an opportunity to change the spectrum of weeds (cool vs.  warm season) in the field.
Planting to moisture
Another technique similar to pre-germination is planting to  moisture. After weeds are killed by cultivation, the top 2 to 3 inches of  soil are allowed to dry and form a dust mulch. At planting, the dust mulch is  pushed away and large-seeded vegetables such as corn or beans can be planted  into the zone of soil moisture. These seeds can germinate, grow, and  provide partial shading of the soil surface without supplemental  irrigations that would otherwise provide for an early flush of weeds.
Buried drip irrigation
Drip tape buried below the surface of the planting bed can  provide moisture to the crop and minimize the amount of moisture that is  available to weeds closer to the surface. If properly managed, this  technique can provide significant weed control during dry period.
3.
Mechanical Weed Control
Mechanical removal of weeds is both time  consuming and labor-intensive but is the most effective method for managing  weeds. The choice of implementation, timing, and frequency will depend on the  structure and form of the crop and the type and number of weeds. Cultivation  involves killing emerging weeds or burying freshly shed weed seeds below the  depth from which they germinate. It is important to remember that any  ecological approach to weed management begins and ends in the soil seed bank.  The sol seedbank is the reserve of weed seeds present in the soil. Observing  the composition of the  seedbank can help  a farmer make practical weed management decisions. Burial to 1 cm depth and  cutting at the soil surface are the most effective ways to control weed  seedlings mechanically.
Mechanical weeders include cultivating  tools such as hoes, harrows, tines and brush weeders, cutting tools like mowers  and stimmers, and dual-purpose implements like thistle-bars. The choice of  implement and the timing and frequency of its use depends on the morphology of  the crop and the weeds. Implements such as fixed harrows are more suitable for  arable crops, whereas inter-row brush weeders are considered to be more  effective  for horticultural use. The brush  weeder is mainly used for vegetables such as carrots, beetroot, onions, garlic,  cerely and leeks. The optimum timing for  mechanical weed control is influenced by the competitive ability of the crop  and the growth stage of the weeds.
Hand hoes, push hoes and hand-weeding  are still used when rouging of an individual plant or patch of weed is the most  effective way of preventing the weed from spreading. Hand-weeding may also be  used after mechanical inter-row weeding to deal with weeds left in the crop row.
Blind, 'over-the top' cultivation  controls very small weeds, just germinated   or emerged, before and sometimes after planting. The entire surface of  the fields is worked very shallow using flex-tine cultivators (e.g. Lely  weeder or rotary hoes, Inter-row cultivations with a rotary hoe in pinto  beans (
Phaseolus vulgaris
L.) gave  adequate weed control without reducing plant stand or injuring the crop.
The hoe-ridger is specifically designed  to achieve intra-row control in sugar beet, Thistle-bars are simple blades used  to undercut perennial weeds with minimal soil disturbance. The brush weeder, or  brush hoe, is used primarily for inter-row weeding of vegetable crop.
Shallow  between-row cultivators such as basket-weeders, beet-hoes, or small sharp  sweeps are used to cut off and uprrt small weeds after the crop is up. These  can get very close to the crop when it's small, without moving much soil into  the row, and may  be the only tools used  on delicate crops like leafy greens, As vigorous crops grown, soil can be  thrown into the row to bury in – row weeds using rolling cultivates (e.g.  Lilliston), spyder wheels  (e.g.  Bezzerides), large sweeps or hilling disks. Some of these tools can be  angled to pull soil away from the row when  plants are small and later turned around to throw soil back on the row during  subsequent cultivators.
4.
Thermal Weed Control
Flamers
Flamers  are useful for weed control. Thermal weed control involves the use of  flaming  equipment to crate direct  contact between the flame and the plant. This technique works by rupturing  plant cells when the sap rapidly expands in the cells. Sometimes thermal  control involves the outright burning down of the weeds. Flaming can be used  either before crop emergence to give he crop a competitive advantage or after  the crop has emerged. However, flaming at this point in the crop production  cycle may damage the crop. Although the initial equipment cost may be high,  flaming for weed control may prove cheaper than hand weeding.
Propane  – fuelled models of flamers are the most commonly used. Flaming dose not burn  weeds to ashes; rather the flame rapidly raises the temperature of the weeds to  more then 130 °F. The sudden increase in temperature causes the plants cell sap  to expand, rupturing the cells walls. For greatest flaming efficiency, weeds must have fewer than  two true leaves. Grasses are difficult to  impossible to kill by flaming because the growing point is protected  underground. After flaming, weeds that have been killed rapidly change from a  glossy appearance to a duller appearance. Flame weeders can be used when the soil  is too moist for mechanical weeding and there is no soil disturbance to  stimulate further weed emergence.
Flaming  can be used prior to crop emergence in slow-germinating vegetables such as  peppers, carrots, onion, and parsley. Onions have some tolerance to flaming and  flame weeding has eben successful in both pre and post-crop emergence  conditions and after transplanting. Transplanted cabbage has some tolerance to  heat, allowing band flaming to be used along the crop row. Damage can occur  when the treatment is applied too early, but the crop usually recovers. In a  young pear orchard, where treatments were started on a clean soil after  cultivation, flaming kept weed growth in check. In an established apple  orchard, there was insufficient control of perennial weeds.
Best  results are obtained under windless conditions, as winds can prevent the heat  from reaching the target weeds. The efficiency of flaming is greatly reduced if  moisture from dew or rain is present on the plants. Early morning and early  evening are the best times to observe the flame patterns and adjust the  equipment.
Soil solarization
During  summer and fall, organic farmers sterilize their soil through solarization. In  this process, a clear plastic film is placed over an area after it has been  tilled and tighly sealed at the edges. Solarization works when the heat crated  under the plastic film becomes intense enough to kill weed seeds.
Infrared weeders
Infrared  weeders are a further development of flame weeding in which the burners heat  ceramic or metal surfaces to generate the infrared radiation directed at the  target weeds. Some weeders use a combination   of infrared and direct flaming to kill the weeds. In general, flame  weeders are considered  to be more  effective because they provide higher temperatures, but burner height and plant  stage are important too. Infrared weeders cover a more closely defined area  than those of the standards flame weeder, but may need time to heat up. '
Freezing
Freezing  would be advantageous only where there is an obvious fire risk from flaming.  Liquid nitrogen and solid carbondioxide (dry ice) can be used for freezing  weeds.
Various  test systems using electrocution, microwaves and irradiation have also been  evaluated for weed control purposes, but high energy inputs, slow work rates  and the safety implications for operators have hampered  developments. Lasers have been shown  to inhibit the growth the
Eichornia crasispes
(water hyacinth) but  did not kill the weed completely. Weed control using ultraviolet light has been  patented but remains at an experimental stage.
5.
Biological Weed Control
Biological control would appear to be  the natural solution for weed control in organic agriculture.
Allelopathy
Allelopathy  is the direct or indirect chemical effect of one plant on the germination,  growth or development of neighboring plants. I is now commonly regarded as  component of biological control. Species of  both crops and weeds exhibit this ability. Allelopathic crops include barley,  rye, annual ryegrass, buckwheat, oats, sorghum, sudan sorghum hybrids, alfalfa,  wheat, red clover, and sunflower. Vegetables, such as horseradish, carrot and  radish, release particularly powerful allelopathic chemicals from their roots.  Suggestions have been  made that  allelochemicals and other natural products or their derivatives could form the  basis of bioherbicides. However, it is unclear whether the application of  natural weed killing chemicals would be acceptable to the organic standard  authorities.
The  alleopathic effect can be used to an advantage when oats are sown with a new  planting of alfalfa. Alleopathy from both the alfalfa and the oats will prevent  the planting  from being choked with  weeds in the first year. Buckwheat is also well known for its particularly  strong weed suppressive ability. Planting buckwheat on weed problem, fields can  be an effective cleanup technique. Some farmers allow the buckwheat to grow for  only about six week before plowing under. This not only suppress and physically  destroys, weeds; it also release phosphorus and conditions the soil.
Beneficial organisms
Little  research has been conducted on using predatory r parasitic microorgniams or  insects to manage weed populations. However, this may prove to be a useful  management tool in the future. Natural enemies that have so far been successful  include a weevil for the aquatic weed salvinia, a rust for skeleton weed and  probably the most famous, a caterpillar (
Cactoblastis
sp.) to control prickly pear. There is also considerable research effort  aimed at genetically engineering  fungi  (myco-herbicides) and bacteria so that they are more effective at controlling  specific weeds. Myco-herbicides are a preparation containing pathogenic spores  applied as a spray with standard   herbicide application equipment.
Weeds  are subject to disease and insect attacks just as crop are. Most biological  control of weeds occurs in range or non crop areas. As a result, biological  control has little relevance for vegetable growers.
Geese  have been used for weed control in trees, vine, and certain row crops. Most  types of geese will graze weeds, but Chinese weeder geese are considered the  best for row crops. Chinest weeder geese are smaller than other types and tend  to walk around delicate crop plants rather than over them. Geese prefer grass  species and rarely eat crops. If confined, geese will even dig up and eat  Johnson grass and Bermuda grass rhizomes. Care must be taken to avoid placing  geese near any grass crops such as corn, sorghum, or small grains, as this is  their preferred food. Fruiting vegetables, such as tomatoes when they begin to  color, might also be vulnerable, so geese would have to be removed from tomato  fields at certain times. Geese require drinking water, shade during hot  weather, and protection from dogs and other predators.
Use of biocontrol  agents for weed control
Name    of the weed
Bioagent
Cyperus    rotundus
Bactra
verutana
Ludwigia    parviflora
Haltica    cynea
(Steel blue beetle)
Parthenism    hysterophorus
Zygrogramma  bicolarata
Lantana    camara
Crocidosema    lantana, Teleonnemia scrupulosa
Opuntia    dilleni
Dactylopius tomentosus, D. Indicus
(cochineal scale insect)
Eichhornea crassipes
Neochetina eichhornea, N. Bruchi
(Hyachinth weevil)
Sameodes    alliguttalis
(hyancinth moth)
Salvinia    molesta
Crytobagus    singularis
(weevil)
Paulinia acuminate
(grass hopper),
Samea    mutiplicalis
Alternanthera    philoxaroides
Agasides    hygrophilla
(flea beetle)
Amynothrips andersoni
Tribulus    terrestris
Microlarinus    lypriformis
,
M. lareynii
Solanum    elaegnifolium
Frumenta    nephalomicta
Use of fish for weed  control
Name    of the weeds
Fish
Lemma,    Hydrilla, Potamogeton
Grass    carp or white amur
Algae
Silver    carp, common carp
Use of competitive plants  for weed control
Name    of the weeds
Competitive    plants
Parthenium    hysterophorus
Cassia    sericea
Typha
sp.
Brachiaria    mutica
Commercial  mycoherbicides
Trade    name
Pathogen
Target    weed
Devine
Phyophthora    palmivora
Morreria odorata
(Strangler vine) in citrus
Collego
Colletotrichum    gleosporoides f.sp. aeschynomene
Aeschynomene    virginica
(northen joint vetch) in rice and soyabean
Biopolaris
Biopolaris    sorghicola
Sorghum    halepense
(Johnson grass)
Biolophos
Streptomyces    hygroscopius
General    vegetation(non-specific)
LUBAO    11
Colletotrichum    gleosporoides
f.sp.
Cuscuttae
Cuscutta    sp. (Dodder)
01
Alternaria    cassiae
Cassia    abtusifolia
ABG    5003
Cercospora    rodmanii
Eichhornea    crassipes
(water hyancinth)
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
© TNAU 2008-2024 All Rights Reserved..