ORGANIC FARMING :: Frequently Asked Questions
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
Organic Farming :: Frequently Asked Questions
Organic  Certification
Is it possible to certify only part of  the farm?
Yes. All certifying bodies operating in  Tasmania will support part certification of a farm. However, they would prefer  that the part certification lead to a whole of property certification within  ten years. A part certification means that a farmer can try organic farming on  part of the holding without having to commit the whole farm.
Can I process both organic and conventional foods?
Yes, many processors who have undertaken to have their  premises certified organic have continued to produce both conventional and  organic lines. Processing organic product imposes some restrictions. Using an  abattoir as an example, organic processing can generally only be carried out as  the first production run after a thorough clean down. This would generally be  in the morning, the Monday after a clean down which usually occurs at the end  of the working week on a Friday.
Processors need to ensure that products are  segregated to ensure that there is no risk of cross contamination through  contact with conventional products. In the cropping/orchard situation, part of  a property can be converted. Where livestock are involved it is more difficult  because they usually cover the whole farm. Where an enterprise processes both  organic and conventional product the facility must be cleaned to organic  standards. This often means that lines are stored until enough organic product  is available to justify the expense of the clean down. If you are in doubt,  talk to your certifying body to clarify the situation.
I have just purchased or hope to  purchase a farm. I would like to farm it organically. Can you give me some  information on crops that I can grow and what I need to do to be organic?
There are many things that will help  you determine which crops can be grown on a farm, such as farm location,  climate, and soil types. Your farming experience/knowledge and your time  availability will also be factors in determining which crops are most suited to  you.
I want to begin farming organically.  How will this be different from the more conventional farming practices that I  already use?
Organic production of crops is very  similar to regular production for planting, harvesting. Varieties are usually  the same. Fertility, weeds and other pests need to be managed in a more  intensive way. Crop rotation and timing of mechanical cultivation are critical  to success. The integration of livestock, to help supply manure/compost  nutrients will also be a benefit.
Is organic farming expanding?
In 2005 there were approx. 500  certified organic farms in Ontario with over 90,000 acres of certified land.  This is more than double the comparable numbers for 1996. Growth of organic  food sales in North America is frequently reported as being consistently around  20% per year for the past 10 years.
What does the process  entail?
Once you have undertaken adequate research and decided that  you want to proceed with certification, you will need to apply to a certification  body, submit an application form and then pay the initial fees. The application  form may include a questionnaire requesting information about the farm  management history, including previous chemical usage, cultivation practices,  fertilisers and pest control inputs. The initial 12 month period is generally  referred to as "pre-certification". The next two years are referred  to as the "in-conversion" period.
Is organic production  economically feasible?
Many factors need to be considered by producers when taking  into account the economic feasibility of converting to organic production.  Often, within the first few years, yields might be reduced. If your region is  not suited to organic production this will also increase financial risks. There  may be reduced costs involved in relation to not having to purchase chemicals,  however, there may be increases related to the cost of organically certified  inputs such as feed, organic fertilisers and segregation.
What pesticides can I use in organic  production?
1 .No chemical weedkillers are allowed  in organic production.
2. A very small number of basic fungicides are allowed – you need to obtain  special permission (derogation) to use them.
3. A very small number of simple insecticides are allowed– you need to obtain  special permission (derogation) to use them.
Can I use fertilizers in organic  production?
Artificial fertilizers are not allowed  in organic production. Soil fertility for growing crops and grass is based on:
Planned cropping rotations
Clover in grazing and cutting swards or green manures
Managed use of manures, composts, and slurries
Approved supplementary fertilizing materials
Imported organic manures such as organic poultry manure –  limited use
Organic means no sprays, no fertilizers,  you just let crops grow – right?
Wrong - Organic production requires you  to develop an integrated production system including:
Planned cropping rotations
Clover as a means of getting nitrogen into the soil
Managed use of manures, composts, and slurries
Carefully selected crop and grass varieties
Mechanical weed control techniques
What is organic farming?
Organic farming is a farming system  which produces high quality food to an EU approved set of standards.Organic  food products leaving a farm or processing plant are certified to these  standards as a means of guaranteeing to consumers that the products have been  produced according to these organic standards.
What is the Organic Farming Scheme?
The Organic Farming Scheme (OFS) is an  Agri-environment package which supports conversion to organic production. OFS  agreements run for a period of five years during which you are committed to  farming according to organic standards and remaining certified by an organic  certification body.
Is there a grant for converting organic  buildings?
There is currently no grant scheme for  organic buildings.
How long does organic  certification take?
Land normally has to go through a  minimum of two years before it achieves full organic status (also known as  symbol status).
Crops sown or transplanted into fully organic land may be sold as organic.
Livestock to be sold as organic will be available some time after the land has  achieved fully organic status. The time period will depend on the type of stock  and other factors.
Does my land have to be tested so it  can be certified as organic?
Land is not tested for pesticide or  other residues unless a problem is suspected, but a recent soil analysis is  required for certification.
Who controls organic certification?
EC Council Regulation 2092/91 controls  and regulates organic production in the EU. It will be replaced by an updated  Regulation 834/2007 on 1 January 2009.
In the UK, Defra publishes the “Compendium of UK Organic Standards” as the UK’s  base line for organic certification, on behalf of the four UK rural affairs  departments.
Who carries out organic certification?
A number of Defra-approved independent  organic certification bodies carry out organic certification on farms and  processing units.
Who do I contact for  certification?
You contact one of the independent  certification bodies directly.
Who should I contact to find out more  and get the process of conversion underway?
A recommended option is to contact the  CAFRE Organic Team on 028 9442 6765.
You will be put in contact with the appropriate organic development adviser who  can assist you with the conversion and certification processes and provide  ongoing technical support.
They will also provide information on the Organic Farming Scheme.
When am I able to sell my first organic  produce?
During the first year of conversion  produce may not be sold as organic – it must be sold onto the non-organic  (conventional) market.
If appropriate, produce during the second year of conversion may be sold as  “organic – in-conversion” produce, if there is a market for it.
Once land has completed its conversion to full organic status, crops sown or  transplanted into fully organic land may be sold as organic.
Livestock to be sold as organic will be available some time after the land has  achieved fully organic status. The time period will depend on the type of stock  and other factors.
What are organic standards?
Organic standards are the set of  “rules” which, as a registered organic producer, you must follow in order to  maintain your certificate which will allow you to sell produce as organic.
Can I use veterinary  medicines in organic livestock production?
Most veterinary medicines are allowed  in organic systems, usually on an individual animal basis.
You need special permission, based on proving a real need, to use them.
If too many medicines are used, there is a risk of animals losing their organic  status.
Does straw for bedding have to be  organic?
Ideally yes, but it is accepted that  there simply is not enough organic straw available, so non-organic straw may be  used.
Source
http://www.icrisat.org/vasat/learning_resources/OrganicFAQs/organic_farming.htm
www.mycorrhizae.com
www.hortsorb.com
http://kendujhar.nic.in/
http://www.greenpeace.org
Home
|
Schemes
|
Trainings
|
Related Information
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2009-16