Agrometeorology: Temperature and Plant Growth
Home |
Seasons & Varieties |
Tillage |
Nutrient Mgmnt |
Irrigation Mgmnt |
Weed Mgmnt |
Crop Protection |
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
Agrometeorology: Temperature and Plant Growth
Influence of Climate on Crops
Climate  is the most important dominating factor influencing the suitability of a crop  to a particular region. The yield potential of the crop mainly depends on  climate. More than 50 per cent of variation of crops is determined by climate.  The most important climatic factors that influence growth, development and  yield of crops are solar radiation, temperature and rainfall.
Effect of Temperature on Plant Growth
Temperature and crop production
Important for growth and development
Optimum temperature is required for maximum dry  matter accumulation.
High night temperature – growth of shoot
Cardinal temperature points
All plants have maximum, optimum and minimum  temperature limits. The limits are cardinal temperature points. Optimum  temperature range is very important.
Wheat
3 – 4°C
minimum
25°
optimum
30° - 32°C
maximum
Rice
10-12°C
minimum
30-32°C
optimum
36-38°C
maximum
(1) Low temperature injury
(2) High temperature injury
1) Low  temperature:
Low temperature affects several aspects of crop growth
viz
., survival, cell division,  photosynthesis, water transport, growth and finally yield.
Chilling injury
If the plants    grown in hot temperature are exposed to low temperature,    they will be killed (or) severely injured.                   When the night    temperature is below 15°C field crops may show yellowing symptoms (eg)    Tropical annuals.
Freezing injury
When the plants    are exposed to how temperature, water freezes into ice    crystals in the intercellular spaces.
(eg) Cell    dehydration
Temperate crops    (potato, tea etc.,)
Suffocation
Formation of    thick cover of ice/snow on the soil surface presents the    entry of oxygen and crop suffers. This presents the respiration and lead to    accumulation of harmful substances.
Heaving
Lifting of    plants along with soil from its actual position by ice, crystals. This is a    mechanical lifting.
Frost damage:
Low  temperature near the canopy due to earth’s re-radiation. If the cell size is  large the probability of frost damage is high.
(1) Advective frosts
Advective frosts are due to incursion of  large masses of cold air over a region from the colder areas.
(2) Radiation frost:
Occur on clear calm nights when heat is  freely radiated from all exposed objects.
(i) Hoar frost (or) white frost:
This is caused due to sublimation of ice  crystals on objects like tree branches.
(ii) Black frost:
The vegetation is frozen because of reduction  of air temperature.
Plant management  against frost damage:
Frost free growing season
Adjusting the sowing time
Selection of   resistant varieties
Sprinkler  irrigation
HIGH TEMPERATURE INJURIES
High  temperature adversely affects mineral nutrition, shoot growth and pollen development  resulting in low yield.
The critical temperature above which plants gets  killed is called thermal ‘death point’.
The temperature above 50°C may kill many annual  crops. –
The limit varies with plants; shade loving  plants are killed at lower temperature.
Mineral Nutrition
High temperature stress causes reduction in  absorption and subsequent assimilation of nutrients.
Absorption of calcium is reduced at temperature  of 28º C in Maize.
Nutrient uptake is affected by both soil and air  temperature in rice.
Nitrate reductase activity decrease under high  temperature.
Shoot growth
High temperature, even for short period, affects  crop growth especially in temperate crops like wheat.
High air temperature reduces the growth of  shoots and in turn reduces root growth.
High soil temperature is more crucial as damage  to the roots is severe resulting in substantial reduction in shoot growth.
High temperature at 38º C in rice reduced plant  height, root elongation and smaller roots.
Pollen development
High temperature during booting stage results in  pollen abortion.
In wheat, temperature higher than 27º C caused  under-development of anthers and loss of viability of pollen.
A temperature of 30º C for two days at reduction  division stage decreased grain yield by drastic reduction in grain set.
Scorching:
High temperature lead to dehydration and  leaves are scorched.
Physiological activities:
High temperature disturbs the photosynthesis  and respiration.
Injury due to scorching sun:
High temperature causes injury on the  exposed area of the plant (eg) Barcks it is know as ‘Sun sclad’
Burning off:
The symptoms are noticed on young seedlings  due to high soil temperature. The seedlings are killed.
Stem gridle:
High soil temperature causes stem scorches  at the ground level (eg) cotton.
Stem girdle
Photo Source:
www.utextension.utk.edu
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2016.