Horticulture :: FAQs :: Medicinal and Aromatics
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: FAQs :: Medicinal and Aromatics
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS – MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC CROPS
MEDICINAL CROPS
1. I want to cultivate senna at Tuticorin. Is there any  released variety in senna?
There  are two varieties in senna namely KKM Se 1 and ALF-T2. KKM Se 1 is suitable for  cultivation in TamilNadu condition.
2. How much seed of senna is required for a hectare of land?
About  15 -20k g of seed is required for cultivating a hectare of senna.
3. What is the optimum season for cultivating senna?
Senna  can be cultivated in February – March and June – July.
4. What is the manural requirement of senna and is there any  need for inorganic fertilizers?
The  crop requires 10-15 t/ha of FYM and NPK at 25, 25 and 40 kg/ha respectively. 25  kg of N is applied in two splits at 40 and 80 days after sowing. Senna proves  better performance with the combined application of organic and inorganic  manures.
5. In my senna field in some plants, a tiny insect is found  sticking to the leaves? How to control these insects?
They  are the aphids occasionally infesting the crop. This pest can be controlled by  spraying dimethoate 30 EC or methyl demeton 25 EC at 1 ml/lit of water.
6. What is the correct stage of harvesting senna?
The  first harvest of leaves and pods are done 2 months after sowing and subsequent  harvests at 30 days interval.
7. I am having only rainfed land. Can I grow senna in my  land?
Yes,  the crop readily performs well under rainfed conditions also. Under such  condition, 1 t/ha of dried leaves and 75-100 kg/ha of dried pods can be  obtained.
8. At which season pyrethrum can be cultivated?
It  can be cultivated during April –May and October – November.
9. Which part of pyrethrum plant is used for medicinal  purpose?
Flowers  are the economic part in pyrethrum.
10. Is it possible to grow digitalis in plains?
No,  it comes up well only in hill slopes with slightly acidic soil having cool and  mild climate.
11. What is the economic part in digitalis?
Dried  leaves.
12. Mention the propagation method of periwinkle.
Periwinkle  can be propagated through seeds either by direct sowing or through  transplanting.
13. What is the seed rate of periwinkle required for  cultivation a hectare of land?
Under  direct sowing method the seed rate required is 2.5 kg/ha and through nursery  technique only 0.5 kg/ha is required.
14. I have six months old periwinkle crop. Can I harvest the  crop by uprooting?
Once  over harvest is not advisable in periwinkle. The crop becomes ready for harvest  of roots after one year only. Before that, two leaf strippings can be taken,  the first one after 6 months and the second after 9 months of sowing. Aerial  parts are cut and the soil is ploughed for harvest of roots. Fruits are  collected without damage.
15. How much yield can we expect from a hectare of  periwinkle?
Irrigated                                Rainfed
Roots                           1500  kg/ha                              750  kg/ha
Stems                          1500  kg/ha                              1000  kg/ha
Leaves                          3000 kg/ha                              2000  kg/ha
16. How to propagate dioscorea?
It  can be propagated through single node leaf cuttings or tuber pieces
17. Is there any special structure required for growing  dioscorea?
The  vines need support for optimum growth and for that a pandal may be provided.  Bamboo poles or gunny twines may be used to lead the vines to the pandal.
18. How can we control aphid and red spider mite infestation  in dioscorea?
Spraying  the crop with 25 ml Dicofol in 10 lit of water to control aphids and red spider  mites.
19. When will the dioscorea vines become ready for harvest  and how much yield can we obtain from a hectare?
The  harvest of tubers is made at two years of age and the yield ranges between 50  to 60 t/ha.
20. Two months before I had sown medicinal solanum seeds.  But the seeds didn’t
germinate until now. What is the reason?
There  are two reasons for the failure of germination. You might have sown the seeds  immediately after their harvest or the seeds which are stored more than one  month. These both factors might be the reason. Actually the seeds require a  resting period of one month and the sowing should not be delayed further.
21. In medicinal solanum nursery, seedlings are found dried  in patches. How to overcome this?
It  is due to the occurrence of damping off disease which occurs during nursery  stage. This may be controlled by drenching the seedlings with copper oxy  chloride @ 2.5 g/l of water.
22. What is the yield of berries in medicinal solanum?
700-800  kg/ha of fresh berries.
23. How can we propagate
Aloe  vera
?
Aloe vera
is propagated through suckers. The  suckers are dipped in 0.1% carbendazim for five minutes and planted in the  field. For one hectare of land 10,000 suckers are required.
24. How to overcome nematode problem in
Coleus forskohlii
?
i.  Crop rotation with sorghum and maize can be adopted
ii.  Planting of marigold along the sides of channels controls nematode population
iii.  Apply 200 kg/ha of neem cake before planting
iv.  Apply 15-20 kg/ha of carbofuran.
25. How to control root rot and wilt problem in coleus?
Apply
Trichoderma viridii
@ 5kg/ha and  mixed with well rottened FYM and applied twice at 20 days interval to control  rootrot.
To  control wilt, drench 300 ppm of
streptocycline
.  Also apply
Pseudomonas fluorescence
mixed in 5kg/ha of well rotten FYM.
26. Explain the postharvest handling in coleus.
Harvested  tubers are cut into small pieces and dried under shade until it reaches 8%  moisture level.
27. What type of supporting materials can we employ for  gloriosa vines?
The  supporting plants like
Commiphora beryii
,
Dodonea viscose
can be used. The  permanent structures with G.I wires can also be formed for growing the vines.
28. Is there any special practice followed to increase the  seed yield in gloriosa?
Hand  pollination must be done between 8 -11 am for getting higher yield in gloriosa.
29. What are the varieties available in tippili for  commercial cultivation?
Vellanikara -1 (Visvum Tippili) and Yercaud (Pl) - 9
AROMATIC CROPS
30. Does the lemon grass needs any inorganic manure  application?
In  addition to 20 – 25 t/ha of FYM or compost as basal , apply 50 kg N/ha  annually, half at planting and half one month after planting. From the second  year onwards, first dose of fertilizer should be applied after cutting and  again one month after the first dose.
31. I have 2 month old lemon grass plants. When can I start  harvesting?
The  lemon grass leaves can be harvested at 90 days after planting and thereafter 75  – 90 days interval. Cut the bush by leaving 10 – 15 cm above the ground level.
32. How drying of citronella leaves can be controlled?
It  is due to the leaf blight incidence. It may be controlled by spraying any one  of the Dithiocarbamates namely Mancozeb or Zineb at an interval of 15 -20 days.
33. What are the activities that should be carried out after  the planting of geranium?
Weeding,  uprooting and burning the diseased plants throughout the life cycle of the  plant. From the second year onwards give a deep soil forking around the plants  to improve the growth of more suckers. Pruning of the bushes is necessary when  the bush shows signs of decline. The branches are cut back leaving 15 -20 cm  once in 4 -5 years.
34. Can use the whole plant of geranium for oil extraction?
No,  the tender tip portion with 6 to 12 nodes can be used economically.
35. Which material is used for propagation in palmarosa?
Seeds  and slips are used for propagating palmarosa. But the establishment of slips  will be poor as compared to seedlings.
36. I am having half an acre of coconut plantation. Can I  grow patchouli as intercrop in this field?
Yes,  patchouli can be cultivated as intercrop. It thrives best in hot and humid  conditions under shade of rubber, coconut, coffee etc.
37. How many years will the mint crop yield economically?
Under  good management conditions, the crop will give economic yield for about four  years.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2015.