Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Nursery management
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Nursery management
NURSERY MANAGEMENT OF ORNAMENTAL PLANTS
Nursery is a place where  seedlings, cuttings and grafts are raised with care before transplanting.
Advantage of raising seedlings  in nursery
It is very convenient to look after the tender  seedlings
It is easy to protect the seedlings from pests and  diseases
Economy of land usage (duration in the main field is  reduced)
Valuable and very small seeds can be raised effectively  without any wastage
Uniform  crop stand in the main field can be maintained by selecting healthy, uniform and  vigorous seedlings in the nursery itself.
Preparation of nursery
Selection of site
The nursery area should be nearer to the water source
Generally, the location should be partially shaded i.e.  under the trees. If not, artificial shade  is to be provided
It should be well protected from animals
Proper drainage facilities should be provided.
Selection of soil
A medium textured, loam (or) sand  loam soil is preferred. Soil should be rich in organic matter. Soil depth  should be preferably by 15-25 cm.
Types of nursery bed
a) Flat bed       b) Raised nursery bed
Preparation of raised nursery  bed
Selected soil should be worked  well to break the clods. Weeds, stones and stubbles should be removed. Height  of the raised bed should be 10-15 cm with a width of 1m and length may be  according to the requirement and conveniences. Two parts of fine red earth, one  part of sand and one part of FYM can be incorporated to each bed to improve  aeration and fertility of the soil. Before preparing the bed, the soil should  be drenched wit 4 % formaldehyde or 0.3 % copper oxy chloride to kill the  pathogenic spores in the soil.
Advantage of raised nursery  bed
Water movement will be uniform and drainage of excess  water is possible (In the case of flat bed water moves from one end to the  other and there is possibility of washing away of seeds).
Germination percentage of seeds is normally high.  Operations like weeding and plant protection measures are easy.
Media for propagating nursery  plants
Several materials and combination  of different materials are available are media for germinating seeds and  rooting cuttings. A good propagating medium should possess the following  characters.
It must be firm and dense to hold the cuttings or seeds  in place during rooting or germination.
It must possess sufficient moisture retaining capacity
It must be sufficiently porous to permit excess water  to drain away and to admit proper aeration
It must be free from weed seeds, nematodes and  pathogens.
1. Soil mixture
This is the most commonly employed  medium for pot plants. It usually consists of red earth, well decomposed cattle  manure, leaf mold, river sand and also charcoal in some cases. Soil mixture  commonly used for propagation is
Red earth       -          2 parts
FYM              -         1  part
Sand             -          1  part
2. Sand
It is the most satisfactory  medium for rooting of cuttings.
3. Peat
It consists of the remains of  aquatic marsh, bog or swamp vegetation which has been preserved under water in  a partially decomposed state. When such peat is derived from sphagnum, hypnum  or other mosses, it is known as peat moss. it is used in mixture after breaking  them and moistened.
4. Sphagnum moss
Commercial sphagnum moss is the  dehydrated young residue or living portion of acid-bog plants in the genus  Sphagnum such as
S. papilliosum
,
S. capillacem
and
S. palustre
. it is generally collected from the tree trunks of the  forest species in south Indian hills above 1500m  above M.S.L. during rainy period. It is  relatively sterile, light in weith and has a very high water-holding capacity.  It is the commonly used medium in air layering.
5. Vermiculite
It is very light in weight and  able to absorb large quantities of water. This can be used as a rooting medium  for air layering and also in pots for raising certain plants.
Container for propagation and  growing young plants
1. Earthen pots
They are made of burnt porous  clay in various sizes to provide requisite amount of soil and root space to  different kinds and sizes of plants. They have straight sides and are made  wider at the top than at the bottom to hold the greatest bulk of compost where  the feeding roots are and also to facilitate easy removal of soil, intact with  roots (ball of earth) at the time of planting or repotting. In our county, tube  pots of varying sizes are used as follows.
Tube pot sizes
Height (cm)
Diameter (cm)
Cost per pot (Rs.)
Tube pot
20
13
15.00
¼ size pot
18
22
15.00
½ size pot
20
27
30.00
¾ size pot
25
32
50.00
Full size pot
35
35
65.00
Tub size pots
35
50
90.00
2. Seed pan and seed boxes
Seeds pans are shallow earthen  pots about 10 cm high and 35 cm in diameter at the top. They have one large  hole for drainage in the centre or 3 holes at equidistant from each other. Seed  boxes are made of wood, 40 cm wide and 60 cm long and 10 cm deep, with 6-8  properly spaced holes drilled in the bottom.
Against each of the holes is  placed a crock with its concave side down. Some large pieces of crock are put  over it and also by the side of this crock, some coarse sand 2 or 3 handfuls  are sprinkled on the crock pieces forming a thin layer to prevent fine soil  from clogging the drainage. Over this, required soil mixture is added. Very  delicate kinds of seeds like Cineraria, Begonia, etc. are best sown in these  containers.
3. Polythene bags
Small polythene bags with holes  punched in the bottom for drainage and filled with a porous rooting medium are  used for propagation of cuttings like Jasmines, Duranta, Crotons etc. in the  mist chamber. Sometimes, young seedlings which are raised in the nursery are subsequently  transplanted in these polythene bags and kept there till they attain required  growth for transplanting them to the main field (Papaya, Curry leaf etc.).
4. Plastic pots
Plastic pots, round and square  are used to keep mostly indoor plants. They are reusable, light weight,  non-porous and they require only little storage space
Tools and implements for  nursery work
Rose can/water can
:
This is used for watering the    nursery. Fine spray of water should be used for watering nursery of small    sized seeds
Digging fork
:
This has prongs of 20 cm long    fitted to a wooden handle. This is used for uprooting plants, rooted    cuttings, harvesting of tubers etc., without damaging the root system or    tubers.
Shovel
:
This is a curved steel plate    attached to a wooden handle and used for transferring soil, manure etc.
Garden rake
:
This is used for leveling lands    and collecting weeds. The rake consists of a number of nail like projections    from a crow bar provided with long handle
Hand trowel
:
This is used as a small tool    for making holes for planting seedlings and small plants. This is also useful    for removing surface weeds in nursery beds
Secateur
:
This is used for cutting small    shoots to regulate shoot growth in fruit trees
Budding or
Grafting knife
:
This knife is used for budding    and grafting. This has two blades in which one is with ivory edge used for    lifting the bark in budding operation.
Potting
Purposes for which plants are  potted are
Preparing plants for sale such as rooted cuttings of  grapes
Growing plants for decoration like crotons
Growing plants for experimental studies like pot  -culture studies
For using plants as rootstocks in certain grafting  methods as in inarching of mango.
Pot mixture or potting compost
It is essential for potting of  plants. The pot mixture is prepared by suing various ingredients. The  proportion of pot mixtures will vary with different kinds of plants.
An ideal pot mixture should have an open structure,  which allows good drainage and holds sufficient moisture for plant growth and  permits excess waster to drain away.
Should supply adequate nutrient to the plants during  all stages of growth
Should be free from all harmful organisms and toxic  minerals and
Should be light in weight
Potting procedure
Wet the seedbed before lifting plants. Life with a ball  of earth with as much of the root system intact, as possible. Do not pullout  seedlings in the hot sun. Do not allow roots or the soil around the roots to  dry.
Fill up pots by putting some crocks first, then a layer  of sand (5-8 cm) and finally pot mixture (8-10 cm).
Place the plant with the ball of earth in the centre  upon the layer of pot mixture (Place on one side of pots in the case of root  stock plants used in inarching)
Put pot mixture around the ball of earth, press as you fill  up and level off, leaving one inch head space at top. Do not press over the  ball of earth. It will break and damage the roots.
Set the stem of plant at the same height as it was in  the seed bed
Immerse pot with plant in a tub of water gently and  keep inside water till air bubbles cease to come out. Remove and place the pot  under shade of trees.
Repotting
Repotting is done for changing  the soil medium for pot bound plants.
Pot bound condition
When the potted plants are grown  for more than one season or one year in pot, the root very soon become a  tangled mass and exhaust all the nutrient in the limited soil, besides being  circumscribed in the limited place. This stage is known as pot bound condition.
Repotting procedure
It is better to west the potted plant 24 hours earlier  to facilitate repotting (removal of plant from pot)
The technique to remove the plant with a ball')f each  intact is to keep the right hand palm over the soil, allowing the stem of the  plant in between the first fingers and turn the pot upside down holding the pot  at the bottom with the left hand and gently knocking the rim of the pot on the  edge of table or any other hard surface or even on the bottom edge of another  inverted pot. The ball of earth comes out of the pot. If for any reason, it  fails to come out, break the pot knocking the sides with a stone or fork and  free the soil from it.
Examine the roots, cut neatly with a secateur, the  decayed, dead and dried or twisted roots. Reduce the size of the ball of earth  around the roots.
Place the plant in the new pot at the same height at  which it was in the old pot. Fill up pot with fresh pot mixture and immerse in  water.
General
The initial reaction after potting and repotting is  wilting. The transpiration loss has to be checked to help plants revive. Hence  keep freshly potted plants under shade and "pot water daily".
After about ten days under shade, the plants should be  gradually exposed to sun by keeping them for some hours under sun and then  putting them under shade. The period of exposure can be increased every week  until finally the plants can be kept in the open. This process is called  "hardening".
Source
1. Dr. N. Kumar. 1997.
Introduction to Horticulture
. Rajalakshmi  Publications, 28/5 – 693, Vepamoodu Junction, Nagercoil. Pp: 15.47- 15.50.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2021.