TNAU Agritech Portal :: Sustainable Agriculture
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Farmers' Innovation
|
Publications
|
FAQs
|
Contact
Technologies :: Sustainable Agriculture
Steps to a Sustainable Agriculture
The agro-ecosystem is made up of many interacting components with multiple goals. Soil quality is one important part of sustainable agro-ecosystem management, analogous to water and air quality. Assessing soil quality may help managers identify practices that could be adapted to become more sustainable.
Soil quality is one aspect of sustainable agro-ecosystem management.
1. Conserve and Create Healthy Soil
Stop soil erosion by terracing, strip cropping, repairing gullies
Add organic matter to soil (with "green manure" cover crops, compost, manures, crop residues, organic fertilizers)
Conservation tillage
Plant wind breaks
Rotatecash crops with hay, pasture, or cover crops
2. Conserve Water and Protect Its Quality
Stop soil erosion in field and pasture
Reduce use of chemicals
Establish conservation buffer areas
Grow crops adapted to rainfall received
Use efficient irrigation methods
3. Manage Organic Wastes and Farm Chemicals So They Don't Pollute
Organic wastes:
Test soil and applying manures and litters only when needed
Compost dead birds and litters
Store litter piles out of the rain and snow
Raise pastured or free-range poultry
Raise hogs in hoop houses or free-range
Farm chemicals and trash:
Look for alternatives to chemicals
Use the least amount necessary
Buy the least toxic chemical
Recycle
Dispose according to label instructions
4. Manage Pests with Minimal Environmental Impact Weed Management
Mechanical Approaches
Mowing
Flaming
Flooding
Tillage
Controlled burns
Cultural Approaches
Crop Rotation
Smother crops
Cover crops
Allelopathic plants
Close spacing of plants
Biological Approaches
Multi-species grazing
Rotational grazing
Chemical Approaches
Integrated Pest Management
Use of narrow spectrum, least-toxic herbicides
Properly calibrated sprayers
Application methods that minimize amount used, drift, and farmer contact
Insect and Disease Management
Introduce or enhance existing populations of natural predators, pathogens, sterile insects, and other biological control agents.
Traps
Maintain wild areas or areas planted with species attractive to beneficial insects
Selective insecticides or botanical insecticides which are less toxic
Trap crops
Crop rotation (avoid monoculture) Intercropping, strip cropping
Maintain healthy soil (prevents soil-based diseases)
Keep plants from becoming stressed
5. Select Plants and Animals Adapted to the Environment
Grow crops and crop varieties well-suited to Oklahoma's climate
Match crops to the soil
Experiment with older, open pollinated varieties that do well without chemical inputs
Raise hardy breeds of livestock adapted to climate
Raise livestock that gain well on grass and native forages
6. Encourage Bio-diversity
(of domesticated animals, crops, wildlife and native plants, microbial and aquatic life) Diversify crops and livestock raised Leave habitat (field margins, unmowed strips, pond and stream borders, etc.,) for wildlife Maintain the health of streams and ponds Provide wildlife corridors rotate row crops with hay crops
7. Conserve Energy Resources
Reduce number of tillage operations
Cut use of chemicals and fertilizers
Develop production methods that reduce horsepower needs
Recycle used oil
Use solar-powered fences and machines
Use renewable, farm-produced fuels: ethanol, methanol, fuel oils from oil seed cops, methane from manures and crop wastes
8. Increase Profitability and Reduce Risk
Diversify crops and livestock
Substitute management for off-farm inputs
Maximize the use of on-farm resources
Work with, not against, natural cycles
Keep machinery, equipment and building costs down
Add value to crops and livestock
Try direct marketing
Home
|
About Us
|
Success Stories
|
Farmers Association
|
Publications
|
FAQs
|
Site Map
|
Disclaimer
|
Contact Us
© 2008-2024 TNAU. All Rights Reserved.