Horticulture :: Fruits:: Mango
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Fruits:: Mango
Mango (
Mangifera indica
L.)
Anacardiaceae
Good Agricultural Practices in Mango - Photo Gallery
Mango Varieties Photo Bank
Success Story of Mango Farmer - Video
Varieties
Neelum, Bangalora, Alphonso,  Rumani, Banganapalli, Kalepad, Peter, PKM 1, PKM 2, Sendura, Jahangir, Mulgoa,  Himayuddin, Paiyur 1, Mallika, Amrapali and Salem Bangalora, Arka Anmol, Arka  Aruna, Arka Neelkiran, Arka Puneeth and Sindhu are popular varieties in mango.
Varieties suiable for Tamil Nadu
Banganapalli, Bangalora, Neelum, Rumani,  Mulgoa, Alphonso, Senthura, Kalepad, Imam Pasand.
Banganapalli
Senthura
Imam Pasand
Processing varieties          :    Alphonso,Banganapalli,Totapuri
Export varieties                 :    Alphonso,Banganapalli,Sendura
Soil and climate
Ideal soil for mango is red loamy. Good drainage is  preferable for better establishment. Ideal pH range is from 6.5 to 8.0.
Season of planting
Planting  spreads from July to December.
Planting material
Approach and epicotyl grafts are used for  planting.
Mango seedlings used for approach / epicotyl grafting
Approach and epicotyl grafting videos
(Download approach grafting video)
(Download epicotyl grafting video)
Field preparation
Dig  pits of 1 m x 1 m x 1 m. Fill in with topsoil mixed with 10 kg of FYM and 100 g   per pit.
Spacing
Adopt any one of the following spacing depending  on requirements.
Under       conventional system of planting:       7-10 m either way
High Density       Planting : 5m x 5 m  (400 plants       /ha)
Double hedge       row system : Adopt  a spacing       of  5m x  5m within double rows and 10m between sucessive double       rows (266 plants/ha)
Planting
Grafts  are planted in the centre of pit with ball of earth intact followed by watering  and staking. The graft union must be 15 cm above the ground level.
Irrigation
Regular  watering is recommended till establishment. Under conventional irrigation  systems, weekly irrigation is essential. However, under micro-irrigation the  requirement is restricted to one-third of the water required for conventional  method.
Intercropping
Short  duration crops like legumes, vegetables, groundnut etc. can be raised during  pre- bearing age.
Manures and  fertilizers (Kg per tree)
Manures and Fertilizers
1st Year
Annual increase
6th year onwards
FYM
10.00
10.00
50
N
0.20
0.20
1.0
P
0.20
0.20
1.0
K
0.30
0.30
1.5
High density planting in mango
Manures  and fertilizers may be applied in September – October. Fertilizers are applied 45  to 90 cm away from the trunk upto the peripheral leaf drip and incorporated.
Fertigation technology under HDP
Apply 1.0:0.5:1.0 kg of NPK / bearing  tree / year under HDP through drip fertigation adopting the following schedule:
Nutrient
Stage of application *
Immediately after harvest
(2 months)
Pre-flowering
(2months)
Flowering to fruit set
(2    months)
Fruit development
(4 months)
Total
N
25 %
40 %
20 %
15 %
100 %
P
50 %
30 %
20 %
-
100 %
K
25 %
20 %
25 %
30 %
100 %
* At each stage, the above  schedule has to be split into six or more doses and applied at
weekly intervals
* Avoid irrigation and fertigation for 30 days for induction of  stress before flowering season;
resume as soon as flowering commences.
Canopy management:
Remove root stock sprouts and low lying branches nearer to ground to  facilitate easy cultural operations. Remove overlapping, intercrossing,  diseased, dried and weak branches in old trees to get good sunlight and  aeration.  Carry out judicious pruning of  the internal branches during August – September, once in three years.  Do not allow flowering upto three years by  removing the inflorescences as and when they appear.  Retain two healthy shoots by trimming away  the weak shoots among the crowded terminal shoots during August-September  annually. Prune back 20 cm of annual growth of the terminals immediately after  harvest.
Top working of senile orchards for rejuvenation:
Use  scions of choice varieties like Alphonso and Banganapalli for top working.  Behead the trees to be top worked portion during July- August leaving the main  trunk at a convenient height and allow for new shoots to develop.  Adopt cleft method of grafting or softwood  grafting on the emerging shoots on the main stem from the cut end during  September- October.
Growth regulators
NAA @  20 ppm is sprayed at flowering to increase the fruit retention.  During February 0.5% Urea (5 g/lit.) or  1% Potassium Nitrate (10g/lit.) may be sprayed to induce flowering, if trees do  not flower by that time. Spraying of 2% KNO3 at mustard size will  increase the fruit set and retention of fruits.
Application of Paclobutrazol @ 10 g a.i. for non-bearing  trees during first fortnight of September will induce flowering and fruitset  yield during off years.
Plant Protection
Pests
Paclobutrazol application
Hopper
Spraying  two rounds of acephate 75 SP@ 1g/lit or phosalone 35 EC  @ 1.5 ml/lit or carbaryl 50 WP 2 g/lit  or phosphamidon 40SL 2 ml/lit of water will control hopper. First at the time  of panicle emergence and the second two weeks after first spray. Wettable  sulphur @ 2 g/lit may be sprayed after spraying carbaryl to avoid mite  resurgence. Phosphamidon + neem oil 5 ml/lit of water can be mixed with any  insecticides for the control of hopper and shoot webber.
Leaf galls and Aphids
Application  of Dimethoate or Methyl demeton @ 2 ml/lit will control the pests.
Flower Webber
Aphid infestation
Application  of Phosalone 35 EC @ 2 ml/lit will control webber.
Nut Weevil
Fenthion  100 EC 1ml/lit spray during marble stage and second spray 15 days after the  first spray will control nut weevil.
Mealy bug
Spraying of Chlorpyriphos 20 EC 2.5ml/lit or Monocrotophos 36  WSC 1.5ml/lit will give control over the pest. Band the trees with 20 cm wide  400 gauge polythene sheets will prevent the spread of the pest. Similarly, release  of Australian ladybird beetle,
Cryptolaemus  montrouzieri
@ 10/tree will be a very effective bio-control measure.
Stem borer
Monocrotophos (36 WSC) 10 ml is soaked in absorbent cotton  and placed on the affected stem by removing the bark of 2.5 cm². Then the  portion is  wrapped with gunny or plastic  papers thereby the chemical gets into the system so as to kill the stem borer.  The trees should not be treated during their bearing stage. Application of  carbofuran 3 G @ 5g per bore hole and plugging with mud after mechanically  removing or killing the grub by introducing a needle or wire will also control  the pest.
Fruit fly
Spraying  of Fenthion 2 ml/lit or malathion 2 ml/lit will control the pest.  Ploughing the inter spaces will expose the pupae.  Pheromone trap with methyl eugenol 1 ml in 1 litre of water + 1 ml of malathion  solution will attract and kill the female insects.  Take 10 ml of this mixture per trap and keep  them in 25 different places in one hectare between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m.  Collect and destroy the fallen fruits.
Diseases
Powdery mildew
Application  of Sulphur dust  (350 mesh) in the early morning will protect new flush or spray Wettable  sulphur 0.2% or Tridemorph 0.05% will control powdery mildew.
Powdery mildew  infestation on leaves
Anthracnose and stalk  end-rot
Pre-harvest  spraying of Mancozeb 2g/lit or Carbendazim 1g/lit or Thiophanate methyl 1g/lit  or Chlorothalonil 2 g/lit, 3 times at 15 days interval will control  anthracnose and stalk end-rot.
Sooty mould
Spraying  Phosphamidon 40 SL @ 2 ml/ litre + Maida 5% (1 kg Maida or starch) boiled with  1 lit of water and diluted to 20 litres will control the incidence of sooty  mould. Avoid spraying during cloudy weather.
Mango  malformation
Use of disease free planting material.
Diseased  plants should be destroyed.
Incidence reduced by spraying 100-200ppm NAA  during October.
Pruning  of diseased parts with the basal 15-20 cm apparently healthy portions.
Followed  by the spraying of Carbendazim (0.1%).
Stem end rot
Dip mangoes in 6 percent borax solution at 43°C  for 3 minutes.
Harvest mangoes on clear dry day.
Injury should be avoided to fruits at all stages  of handling.
SprayCarbendazim  (0.1%) or Chlorothalonil (0.2%) in the field.
Red rust
Bordeaux  mixture (1%), or Copper oxychloride 0.25%
Red rust
Harvest Season
Harvest  spreads from March to June.
Harvest and yield
Yield  varies with varieties and spacing adopted.
8 – 10  t/ha upto 15 years.
15 – 20  t/ha from 15 – 20 years.
Post Harvest  treatment
Packing of mango
Dip the fruits in 52 ± 1°C hot water immediately after harvest  for 5 minutes followed by 8% plant wax (Fruitox or Waxol) to reduce anthracnose  disease in mango during storage.  Two  pre-harvest sprays of 0.20% Mancozeb (2.0 g/lit) will also reduce the  incidence.
Waiting Period
Dimethoate
14 days
Methyl    demeton 0.05%
14 days
Fenthion    0.05%
14 days
Quinalphos 0.05%
12 days
Market Information
Growing Districts
Krishnagiri, Vellore, Dindigul, Thiruvallur, Dharmapuri,    Theni
Major Markets in Tamil Nadu
Theni,    Dharmapuri, Salem, Tirunelveli.
Preferred  Varieties    and Hybrids
Banganapalli, Bangalora,    Neelum, Rumani, Mulgoa, Alphonso, Totapuri
Grade Specification
Firmness, lack of    decay/defects, uniformity of size and shape, skin color, flesh color and    flavor
Small - Less than 200 g
Medium- 201-400 g
Large-401-600 g
Extra-large - 601-800 g
Export Market
UAE, Kuwait and other Middle East countries.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2008-2024.