Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Bonsai
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Landscaping :: Bonsai
BONSAI MAKING
Bonsai is an art of  growing and training of a plant to a miniature form having a natural look of  old age. It was originated from china, but it was called as the Japanese art.  It involves techniques of extreme dwarfing. The optimum size of bonsai may be  only 30 to 60 cm in height, but miniature sizes of below 25 cm have also been  preferred. Bonsai of minimum 10 years old are period, but of 100 and even 200  years of age are available and are highly valued as ‘venerable’ specimens.
Bonsai requires  special types of containers. They should be usually shallow with 5 to 7.5 cm  deep (except for cascade type of bonsai for which deep pots can be used).  Round, hexagonal or square shaped containers with 25 to 30 cm diameters are  preferred. Containers with specific colours like mosaic, sky blue, terra cotta,  grey or jungle green are well suited for bonsai culture. Plants adaptable for  extreme dwarfing like juniper. pine, elm, maple, cypress are suitable materials  for bonsai culture. But in tropical places like India, the tree species like  Manilkhara, Sapota, Bassia, Tamarind and Ficus spp. and shrubs like West Indian  cherry are well suited.
Trunk and branches  may be bent, forced and tied by coiling them with heavy wire. This wire is  removed after several months when training to shape has been accomplished. The  bonsai plants may be trained to different shapes like twisted trunk, upright,  S-shaped, semi-cascade, cascade, slanting or any other formal shape. Planting  of both tips and roots is usually done at planting time and periodically  pinching the tip and removing the excess side shoots are essential to maintain  the general outline of design. Annually, the plants are either repotted or  lifted from the pot, root pruned and reset.
The bonsai plant is  fed sparingly of week fertilizer solution containing major and minor nutrients.  Sometimes extracts of oil cakes may be also added. Similarly, the plant is  given only minimum requirements of moisture. It is advisable to water twice a  day to plants kept in shallow containers and once a day to plants kept in  deeper pots.
Selection of hardened  woody plants that have been subjected to adverse conditions is a good starting  point. Such kind of planting materials may be collected from rock crevices of  from the walls of any buildings. Old seedlings kept in containers form any  nursery or cutting, grafted plants or layers may be also utilized in bonsai  culture.
Where it succeeds?
Under  open sunny conditions
Under  air conditions
As  indoor near windows only.
Rules for Bonsai  making
For trunk
Height  can be 6 times the caliper of the trunk.
Should  lean towards the viewer.
It  should anchor the plant.
Roots  should radiate.
No  eye poking roots.
Should  taper  as it ascends
Should  not move back
For Branches
Should  not cross the trunk
No  eye poking branches
First  branch should be at one third height of the tree
No  belly branches
Should  be opposite
Should  diminish in size as it ascends
Secondary  branches are to be alternate
Principles of Bonsai
Look for
Small  leaves or needles
Shorter  internodes
Attractive  bark or roots
Branching  characteristics
To enhance the age
,
expose the one  third of the roots
Before  potting, the twisted and tangled roots are to be straightened.
Upper  branches should not overshadow the lower branches.
Plants suitable for Bonsai making
1. Ficus benjamina
2.
Ficus Carmona microphylla
3.
Ficus nerifolia
4.
Ficus retusa
5.
Ficus virens
6.
Ficus pelkan
7.
Ficus parasitica
8.
Ficus krishna
9.
Ficus elastica
10.
Ficus trangularis variegated
11.
Ficus mysorensis
12
. Ficus nooda Variegated
13.
Ficus tomentosa
14.
Ficus saliscifolia
15.
Ficus jaquinifolia
16. Ficus  long Island
17.
Ficus  marginata
18.
Ficus  lipstick
19.  Bougainvillea
20.  Bottle Brush - Red / White / Lavender
21.  Black Olive
22.  Brazilian Raintree
23.  Cashew
24.  Casuarinas
25. Chinese Banyan
26. Chinese Mini Orange
27.  Duranta Gold
28.  Duranta Variegated
29. Golden Cypress
30.
Hamelia  patens
31.
Hibiscus  rosea sinensis
32. Inga Dulse Variegated
33.  Jackaranda
34. Jasmine Kamini
35.
Juniper chinensis
36. Karonda
37. Lavender Brown
38. Lavender Green
39. Badam
40. Mango
41.
Murraya exotica
42.
Murraya paniculata
43. Neem
44. Pine
45. Pomegranate Mini
46.  Powder Puff - White / Pink / Red    (Calliandra)
47. Poinsettia Mini
48.  Kumquat
49. Sapota
50. Scheffleura Variegated
51. Silver Oak
52. Surinam Cherry
53. Tamarind
54.  Wood apple
55.  West Indian Cherry
56.
Wrightia religiosa
Styles of bonsai
Formal Upright
It is one of the most  natural styles where the trunk is perfectly straight. The branches should  alternate left to right to suggest age. The bottom third branches are removed  and the remainder is drawn downward.
Formal upright    style
Informal Upright
This style is  characterized by a lightly curving trunk displaying the harsh elements of  nature. This can be achieved with ease using wire and/or cords. It is as  appropriate for conifers as with deciduous trees.
Informal upright    style
Broom
It
has a straight trunk that begins to divide and subdivide into many branches.  The characteristics are its thick and finely branched crown. Some trees for  this style are Beech, Elm, False cypress and Maple.
Broom style
Slanting
It is so called  because the general slope of the trunk is highly pronounced. The branches  should lie horizontal or droop slightly downward. The surface roots have an  unstable appearance but have a well anchored impression.
Slanting style
Windblown
It
is rare in  nature. This kind of tree is found on cliffs or mountains. The trunk, branches  and twigs are trained in a single direction to give the affect of a strong wind  and storm.
Windblown style
The Clasped-to-Stone
It is a much loved  but difficult to create style. The size and shape of the rock should complement  the plant that is set on a gravel or water dish. A whole chapter could be spend  on this style.
Clasped-to-stone style
Agrotechniques for  Bonsai
1. Propagation
2. Season
3. Potting and repotting
4. After care
5. Container
6. Planting media
Propagation
Through seeds,  cuttings, layering or grafting
Seeds: Pines and  Junifers
Cuttings: Ficus,  Pomegranate, Mulberry and Bougainvilleas
Layers: Jasmine,  Ixora, Bougainvilleas and Pome granate
Grafts: Mango,  Sapota, Citrus
Season
1 July - August
2. Febraury - March
Best time is before  opening of the buds
Potting and repotting
1/3  of the roots can be trimmed
Long  tap roots are to trimmed
Excessive  branches are to thinned out
Balanced  nutrition and adequate watering is must
Potting  is not advisable during winter or hot months
Repotting  is done after 2-3 years
After care
Pinching        -           Once or  twice
Pruning         -           For its shape
Training         -           Desirable  shape
It is achieved  through copper wire or polythene tape. It is to be removed once the shape is  attained.
Containers
Mostly  terracotta or ceramic
Small  in size
Square/round/rectangle/oval  in shape
Preferred  is oval / rectangle
In round / square the  plant is to be in the centre
In others placed in  the sides of the containers.
Planting Media
Media consists of
Loam soil                 2 parts
Leaf mould               1 parts
Coarse sand             little
Media can be covered  with moss and one or two pebbles can be placed to give a natural look.
Source
1. http://www.bonsai-tree-books.com/wp-content/themes/bible-scholar/images/formal_upright1.jpg
2.  http://www.dkimages.com/discover/previews/817/25103526.JPG
3. http://www.bonsai-tree-books.com/wp-content/themes/bible-scholar/images/broom_style1.jpg
4.  http://www.bonsai-nbf.org/site/images/3_local/jack-4.jpg
5.  http://dragongardennursery.com/images/Gallery/gallery021B.jpg
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2013.