Glossary :: I
Indeterminate  growth
The flowers are borne on  lateral branches, the central stem continuing vegetative growth with blooming  continued for a long period like in cotton.
Integrated pest management (IPM)
IntegratingÂ  chemical, biological, and cultural controls  in an overall pest control program.
Indigenous  knowledge (IK)
Knowledge  of the people living in certain area, generated by their own and their  ancestors, experience and including knowledge originated from elsewhere which  has been internalized by the local people.
Inert  matter
Â
Foreign matters such as  pieces of broken or damaged seeds, empty glumes, lemmas, paleas, soil, sand  chaff, stems etc., and all other matter not seeds.
In  situ moisture conservation
A  practice adopted for conserving rainwater minimizing runoff or percolation to  maximize. The objective of this exercise is to preserve maximum moisture in the  soil for use by crops. Moisture conservation can be achieved by several  methods: Impounding rainwater with contour and vegetative bunds; Adopting  appropriate land configurations through tillage; shallow tillage, for instance,  aids in water percolation while deep tillage in black soils modifies the soil  profile, forming a hard pan which does not allow percolation into the ground  water zone;
Integrated  nutrient management
Â
Judicious use of  inorganic, organic and biofertilisers in an integrated manner to maximize  production, sustain soil productivity and maintain soil health.
Integrated  pest management (IPM)
Economic,  ecological environmental and social strategy that focus on long-term prevention  or suppression of Â pest problems through  a combination of techniques such as encouraging biological control, use of  resistant varieties or adoption of alternative cultivation practices or  modification of habitat to make it incompatible with pest development.
Integrated  weed management
Â
Application of many  kinds of weed management technology in a mutually supportive manner.
Intensive  cropping
Maximum  use of the land by means of frequent succession of harvested crops.
Intercropping
The practice of  cultivating two or more crop simultaneously in the same field is called  intercropping. In this system, there is a main crop and a subsidiary crop growing  simultaneously. The crops grown in such a system do not compete with each other  but are compatible.
Irrigation,  drip
Drip  irrigation involves the application of water, drop by drop to the root zone of  the crop. Water is thus used very economically and the losses due to deep  percolation and surface evaporation are minimized. The equipment consists of a  pumping unit (to create a pressure of 2.5 kg per sq.cm ), pipelines and drip  type nozzles. The amount of water dripping from the nozzle can be regulated to  meet the plant requirement. This method is well suited for arid regions and  high value crops (fertigation) is now being used to irrigate orchard crops.
Irrigation,  sprinkler
In  this practice, water is sprayed into the air through small nozzles and allowed  to fall on the ground at a rate lower than the soil infiltration rate resulting  in the use of a very small quantity of water to irrigate a large area. This  method is particularly suited to sandy soils with a high infiltration rate, and  areas with sloppy topography. The limitations of the sprinkle system is high  installation cost.