Horticulture :: Fruits:: Minor Fruits
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Fruits::
Jamun Fruit
Jamun (
Syzygium cumini
)
Introduction
Soil
Climate
Species and Varieties
Propagation
Planting
Fertilizer Application
Irrigation
Intercropping
Training and Pruning
Insect Pests
Diseases
Flowering and Fruiting
Harvesting and Yield
Storage and Marketing
Uses and Composition
Jamun  is a popular indigenous fruits Of India. It has got very valuable place in  Auyurvedic medicines. It is believed to be a boon for diabetic patients. But in  India, its organised orcharding is still lacking mainly because of lack of  proper information on cultivation practices and non-availability of dwarf and  high yielding varieties. In this booklet all the information on jamun  cultivation has been collected and presented in a simple and interesting form.
I. Introduction
The  jamun is an important indigenous minor fruit of commercial value. It is also  known as black plum, Indian black cherry, Ram jamun etc. in different parts of  India. The tree is tall and handsome, evergreen, generally grown for shade and  windbreak on roads and avenues.
The  original home of jamun is India or the East Indies. It is also found in  Thailand, Philippines, Madagascar and some other countries. The jamun has  successfully been introduced into many other subtropical regions including  Florida, California, Algeria, Israel, etc.
In  India, the maximum number of jamun trees are found scattered throughout the  tropical and subtropical regions. It also occurs in the lower range of the  Himalayas up to an elevation of 1,300 meters and in the Kumaon hills up to  1,600 meters. It is widely grown in the larger parts of India from the  Indo-Gangetic plains in the North to Tamil Nadu in the South. The data about  its total acreage in India are not available.
II. Soil
The  jamun tree can be grown on a wide range of soils. However, for high yield  potential and good plant growth, deep loam and a well drained soil are needed.  Such soils also retain sufficient soil moisture which is beneficial for optimum  growth and good fruiting. Jamun can grow well under salinity and waterlogged  conditions too. However, it is not economical to grow jamun on very heavy or  light sandy soils.
III. Climate
Jarnun  prefers to grow under tropical and subtropical climate. It is also found  growing in lower ranges of the Himalayas up to an altitude of 1300 meters. The  jamun requires dry weather at the time off towering and fruit setting. In  subtropical areas, early rain is considered to be beneficial for ripening of  fruits and proper development of its size, colour and taste.
IV. Species and Varieties
Top
The  species and varieties of jamun are discussed below.
A. Species
The  genus Eugenia comprises of 1,000 species of evergreen trees and shrubs, most of  them being tropical in origin. Some of the old world
Eugenia
species are  now placed in the genus
Syzygium
. It belongs to the family
Myrtaceae
.  Many of these species yield edible fruits and some of these are of ornamental  and medicinal value. A wild species
S.frniticosum
with small edible  fruits is grown as windbreaks. The large evergreen tree has small dark purple  fruits with prominent elongated seeds. The fruit is an astringent (causing  contraction of body tissue) even when ripe. A popular fruit is the rose apple  or gulab-jamun (S.jambos). It is found in South India and West Bengal. The tree  is very ornamental. The fruit is yellow in colour, generally insipid in taste  and has high pectin content.
S.  zeylanica
, small tree with edible fruits, is found on  the Western Ghats and S.
malaccensis
(Malay rose apple) found in South  India. Another related fruit found in South India is Surinam cherry (
S.  uniflora
). It is a small tree with blight red aromatic fruits.
S.  javanicum
(water apple) is also found in South India and West Bengal.
S.densiflora
is used as rootstock in jamun (
S. cumini
) and is resistant to the  attack of termites.
B. Varieties
There  are no standard varieties of this fruit under cultivation. The common variety  grown under North Indian conditions is "Ram Jarnun". It produces big  sized, oblong fruits, deep purple or bluish-black in colour at full ripe stage.  The pulp of the ripe fruit is purple pink and the fruit is juicy and sweet. The  stone is small in size. The variety ripens in the month of June- July and it is  very common both in rural as well as in urban markets.
Ram Jamun
Other Variety
Another late maturing  variety bears small sized, slightly round fruits, deep purple or blackish in  colour at full ripe stage. The colour of the pulp is purple, less juicy, the  weight and sweetness of pulp is also less in comparison to that of 'Ram
J  arnun'
. The stone present in this variety is comparatively large in size.  Fruits ripen in the month of August.
At  present, there are a number of seedling strains of jarnun in India which  provide a good scope for selection of better varieties.
V. Propagation
The  jamun is propagated both by seed and vegetative methods. Due to existence of  polyembryony, it comes true to parent through seed. Though vegetative methods  followed in most cases have attained some success, seed propagation is still  preferred. However, seed propagation is not advisable as it results in late  bearing.
The  seeds have no dormancy. Fresh seeds can be sown. Germination takes place in  about 10 to 15 days. Seedlings are ready for transplanting for the use as  rootstock in the following spring (February to March) or monsoon i.e. August to  September.
Propagation  of jarnun is economical and convenient. Budding is practiced on one year old  seedling stocks, having 10 to 14 mm thickness. The best time for budding is  July to August in low rainfall areas. In the areas where rains start easily and  are heavy, budding operations are attempted early in May-June. Shield, patch  and forkert methods of budding have proved very successful. The possibility of  better success has been reported in forkert method compared to shield or 'T'  budding.
Jamun can also be propagated by inarching but it is  not adopted commercially. In this method one year old seedlings raised in pots  are inarched with mother jamun trees with the help of wooden stands during  June-July.
About  60% air layers are obtained with 500 ppm IBA in lanolin paste, provided air  layering is done in spring and not in the rainy season.
Better  rooting through cutting is obtained in Jamun under intermittent mist.  Semi-hardwood cuttings of both
S. jambos
and
S.javanica
, 20-25 cm  long, taken from the spring flush and planted in July treated with 2000 ppm IBA  (indole butyric acid) give better results.
VI. Planting
Top
Jamun  is an evergreen tree and can be planted both in spring i.e. February -March and  the monsoon season i.e. July-August. The latter season is considered better as  the trees planted in February- March have to pass through a very hot and dry  period in May and June soon after planting and generally suffer from  mortalities from the unfavourable weather conditions.
Prior  to planting, the field is properly cleared and ploughed. Pits of 1 x 1 x 1 m  size are dug at the distance of 10m both ways. Usually, work of digging of pits  is completed before the onset of monsoon. The pit are filled with mixture of75%  top soil and 25% well rotten farmyard manure or compost.
Another  common way of growing jamun trees is to plant them as shade trees near the farm  dwellings and wells. Here they provide a welcome shadow besides fruit.
VII. Fertilizer Application
The  jamun trees are generally not manured. This is not because they do not require  manuring or fail to respond to it but because they can stand a good deal of  neglect. An annual dose of about 19 kg faI1nyard manure during the pre-beating  period and 75 kg per tree bearing trees is considered.
Normally, seedling jamun trees start  bearing at the age of 8 to 10 years while grafted or budded trees come into  bearing in 6 to 7 years. On very rich soils, the trees have a tendency to put  on more vegetative growth with the result that fruiting is delayed. When the  trees show such a tendency, they should not be supplied with any manure and  fertilizer and irrigation should be given sparingly and withheld in  September-October and again in February-March.
This helps in fruit bud  formation, blossoming and in fruit setting. Sometimes this may not prove  effective and even more drastic treatments such as ringing and root pruning may  have to be resorted to.. A fruit grower has, therefore, to be cautious in  manuring and fertilizing jamun trees and hence, has to adjust the doses  according to the growth and fruiting of trees.
VIII. Irrigation
In early stages,  the jamun tree requires frequent irrigations but af1cr the trees gets  established, the interval between irrigations can be greatly decreased. Young  trees require 8 to 10 irrigations in a year. The mature trees require only  about half the number, which should be applied during May and June when the  fruit is ripening. During autumn and winter months, just an occasional  irrigation may be applied when the soil is dry. This will also save the trees  from the ill effects of frost in winter.
IX. Intercropping
In  the initial years of planting, when a lot of interspace is available in the  orchard, appropriate intercrop especially legummous crops and vegetables can be  taken dunng rainy season.
X. Training and Pruning
Top
Regular  pruning in jamun is not required. However, in later years the dry twigs and  crossed branches are removed. While training the plants, the framework of  branches is allowed to develop above 60 to 100 cm from the ground level.
XI. Insect Pests
Among  the pests, white fly and leaf eating caterpillar cause great damage to the tree.
1. White fly  (Dialeurodes eugenia)
It  damages jamun tree in all parts of India. Affected fruits get wormy appearance  on the surface. White fly can be controlled in the following ways.
a. Maintain  sanitary conditions around the tree.
b. Pluck all affected  fruits and destroy them.
c. Dig up the soil  around the tree trunk so that the maggots in the affected fruits and pupae  hibernating in the soil are destroyed.
2. Leaf eating  caterpillar (Carea subtillis)
This  caterpillar is only found in Coimbatore. The insect infests the leaves and may  defoliate the tree. It can be controlled by spraying Rogor 30 EC or Malathion @  0.1 per cent.
3. Other pests
Besides  the above insects, the jamun crop is seriously damaged by pests like squirrels  and birds like parrots and crows. These have to be frightened away by beating  the drums or flinging stones.
XII. Diseases
Top
Among  the diseases, the fungal disease anthracnose is notable .
1. Anthracnose  (Glomerella cingulata)
The  fungus incites leaf spots and fruit rot. Affected leaves show small scattered  spots, light brown or reddish brown in colour. Affected fruits show small water  soaked, circular and depressed lesions. Ultimately, the fruits rot and shrivel.
Spraying with  Dithane Z- 78 @ 0.2% or Bordeaux mixture at : 4:4:50 concentration shall check  the disease.
XIII. Flowering and Fruiting
Flowers  are borne in the axils of leaves on branchlets. In North Indian conditions,  flowering starts in the first week of March and continues up to the end of  April. The pollen fertility is higher in the beginning of the season. The  maximum receptivity of stigma is one day after anthesis.
The  jamun is a cross-pollinated and the pollination is done by honey bees,  houseflies and wind. The maximum fruit set can be obtained by hand pollination  when it is done after one day of anthesis. Thereafter, a sharp decline is  observed in fruit set.
There  is heavy drop of flowers and fruits within 3 to 4 weeks after blooming. Later  natural fruit drop can be reduced with two sprays of GA3 60 ppm, one at full  bloom and another 15 days after initial setting of fruits.
The  pattern of growth and fruit development of jamun can be divided into three  phases: the first phase from 15-52 days after fruit set having slow growth of  fruit, the second phase from 52 to 58 days after fruit set having fast growth  and the third and last phase from 58 to 60 days after fruit set having slow  growth and very little addition in fruit weight.
XIV. Harvesting and Yield
Top
The  seedling jamun plants start bearing after 8 to 10 years of planting, while  grafted ones bear after 6 to 7 years. However, commercial bearing starts after  8 to 10 years of planting and continues till the tree becomes 50 to 60 years  old. The fruit ripens in the month of June -July. The main characteristic of  ripe fruit at full size is deep purple or black colour. The fruit should be  picked immediately when it is ripe, because it can not be retained on the tree  in ripe stage. The ripe fruits are hand picked singly by climbing the tree with  bags slung on the shoulder. Care should be taken to avoid all possible damage  to fruits.
The  average yield of fruits from a full grown seedling tree is about 80 to 100 kg  and from a grafted one 60 to 70 kg per year.
XV. Storage and Marketing
The  fruits are highly perishable in nature. They cannot be stored for more than 3  to 4 days under ordinary conditions. However, pre cooled fruits packed in  polythene bags can be stored well up to three weeks at low temperatures of 8 to  10°C and 85 to 90% relative humidity.
The  fruit is packed and sent to the market almost daily. For marketing, well ripe  and healthy fruits are selected. Damaged, diseased and unripe fruits are  discarded. These selected fruits are then carefully packed in wooden baskets  and sent to the local markets.
XVI. Uses and Composition
Jamun  fruit possesses considerable nutritive value. Apart fi'om minerals, sugars, and  proteins, it is a good source of iron also. The nutritive value of this fruit  is given in the following table 1
Table 1:  Nutritive value of Jamun fruit
Top
Sl.No
Nutrient
Percentage
1
Moisture
28.2
2
Protein
0.7
3
Fat
0.1
4
Mineral
0.4
5
Fibre
0.9
6
Carbohydrate
19.7
7
Calcium
0.02
8
Phosphorus
0.01
9
Iron
1.0
10
Calorific    value
83/100    g
The  tasty and pleasantly flavoured fruit is mostly used for dessert purposes. The  fruit is usually eaten with salt. The jamun fruit has sub-acid spicy flavour.  Apart from ~ating fresh, it can be used for making delicious beverages,  jellies, jam, squash wine, vinegar and pickles. Jamun squash is a very refreshing  drink in summer season. A little quantity of fruit syrup is very useful for  curing diarrhoea. A mixture of jamun juice and mango juice in equal quantity is  very useful for quenching thirst for diabetic patient. Jamun is used for  preparation of wine particularly in Goa.
The vinegar prepared from juice  extracted from slightly ripe fruits is stomachic, carminative and diuretic,  apart from having cooling and digestive properties.Almost  every part of the tree is used for one purpose or other. A tree made of tender  leaves and alcoholic extracts of leaves and fruits is used in South America for  curing the stomach disorder. Powdered seeds are also very useful for the cure  of diabetes. The seed powder of jamun reduces the quantity of sugar in the  urine very quickly and permanently.
It is used as a lotion for the cure of ring  worm.Jamun  seeds can be used as a concentrate for animals because itis rich in protein,  carbohydrate and calcium. Its wood is used for manufacturing railway sleepers.  It is not attacked by wood decaying insects or fungi. There are a lot of other  uses of jamun fruits too.
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Photo Bank
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2008-2024.