Agrometeorology :: Relative Humidity and Plant Growth
Home |
Seasons & Varieties |
Tillage |
Nutrient Mgmnt |
Irrigation Mgmnt |
Weed Mgmnt |
Crop Protection |
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
Agrometeorology :: Relative Humidity and Plant Growth
Relative Humidity
Relative humidity:
It is the ratio of actual  water vapour content to the saturated water vapour content at a given  temperature and pressure expressed in percentage (%).
Diurnal variation in relative humidity:
Mean  maximum relative humidity occurs in the early morning.
Mean  minimum, relative humidity occurs in the early afternoon.
Low  RH in the afternoon is due to expansion of air and thus increases the total water vapour capacity
Distribution of RH
Maximum  RH is in the equatorial region due to high evaporation.
Decreases  towards poles upto 30° N and S due to subsiding air mass.
RH  increases in poles due to low temperature.
Effect of Relative Humidity on Crop Production
Relative humidity (RH) directly influences  the water relations of plant and indirectly affects leaf growth,  photosynthesis, pollination, occurrence of diseases and finally economic yield.
The dryness of the atmosphere as  represented by saturation deficit (100-RH) reduces dry matter production  through stomatal control and leaf water potential.
Leaf Growth
Leaf  growth not only depends on synthetic activities resulting from biochemical  process but also upon the physical process of cell enlargement.
Cell  enlargement occurs as a result of turgor pressure developed within the cells.
Turgor pressure is high under RH due to less  transpiration. Thus leaf enlargement is high in humid areas
Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis  is indirectly affected by RH. When RH is low, transpiration increases causing  water deficits in the plant.
Water  deficits cause partial or full closure of stomata and increase mesophyll  resistance blocking entry of carbon dioxide.
Pollination
Moderately  low air humidity is favourable for seed set in many crops, provided soil moisture  supply is adequate.
For example, seed set in wheat was high  at 60 per cent RH compared to
80 per    cent when water availability in  the soil was not limiting.
At  high RH pollen may not be dispersed from the anthers
Pests
The  incidence of insect pests and diseases is high under high humidity conditions.
High  RH favours easy germination of fungal spores on plant leaves.
For  example
The blight diseases of potato  and tea spread more rapidly under humid conditions.  Several insects such as aphids and jassids  thrive better under moist conditions.
Grain Yield
Very high or very low RH is not  conducive for high grain yield. Under high humidity, RH is negatively  correlated with grain yield of maize. The yield reduction was 144 kg/ha with an  increase in one per cent of mean monthly RH. Similarly, wheat grain yield is  reduced in high RH. It can be attributed to adverse effect of RH on pollination  and high incidence of pests. On the contrary, increase in RH during panicle  initiation to maturity increased grain yield of sorghum under low humidity  conditions due to favourable influence of RH on water relations of plants and  photosynthesis. With similar amount of solar radiation, crops that are grown  with irrigation gives less yield compared to those grown with equal amount of  'water as rainfall. This is because the dry atmosphere, which is little  affected by irrigation, independently suppresses the growth of crops.
Very High Relative humidity:
Reduces evapotranspiration
Increases  heat load of plants
Stomatal  closure
Reduced  CO2 uptake
Reduced  transpiration influences translocation of food materials and nutrients.
Moderately  high RH of 60-70% is beneficial.
Low  RH increases the evapotranspiration
|
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2021.