Horticulture :: Plantation Crops :: Cocoa
|
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
|
Horticulture :: Plantation Crops :: Cocoa
Cocoa (
Theobroma cacao
L.)
Malvaceae
Cocoa Growers + Consumers
Cocoa is an important commercial plantation  crop of the world. Cocoa is a crop of humid tropics and so it was introduced as  a mixed crop in India in areas where the environments suit the crop. It is  cultivated in coconut and arecanut plantations large scale from 1970 onwards.  It is grown as an under- storey intercrop with sufficient shade in southern  states of India. In India, the current production is about 12,000 Metric Tonnes  and Tamil Nadu produces about 400 Metric Tonnes.
Climate and soil
The natural habitat of the cocoa tree is in the  lower storey of the evergreen rainforest, and climatic factors, particularly  temperature and rainfall, are important in encouraging optimum growth
.
Cocoa is a perennial crop, and it can  withstand different seasonal variations with good health and yield potential.  Cocoa is normally cultivated at altitudes upto 1200 m above MSL with an annual  rainfall of 1000mm to 2000mm and a relative humidity of 80 % with maximum 350C  and minimum temperature of 150C. Cocoa can be grown as intercrop in  coconut and arecanut gardens. It  is predominantly grown on red laterite soils. It thrives well on wide range of  soil types with pH ranging from 4.5- 8.0 with optimum being 6.5- 7.0.
Varieties
There are three varietal types in cocoa namely Criollo, Forastero and Trinitario. Forastero types are known to perform well under Indian conditions.
KAU Varieties and hybrids
CCRP – 1
CCRP – 2
CCRP – 3
CCRP – 4
CCRP– 5
CCRP – 6
CCRP – 7
CCRP – 8
CCRP – 9
CCRP – 10
CCRP – 11
CCRP – 12
CCRP – 13
CCRP – 14
CCRP – 15
Central Plantation Crops Research Institute, Vittal varieties and hybrids.
VTLCC-1 Vittal Cocoa Clone 1
VTLCS-1 Vittal Cocoa Selection 1
VTLCS-2 Vittal Cocoa Selection 2
VTLCH-1 Vittal Cocoa Hybrid 1
VTLCH-2 Vittal Cocoa Hybrid 2
VTLCH-3 Vittal Cocoa Hybrid 3
VTLCH-4 Vittal Cocoa Hybrid 4
VTLCH-5 Vittal Cocoa Hybrid 5 (Nethra Centura)
Vittal Cocoa Clone 1
Vittal Cocoa Selection 1
Vittal Cocoa Selection 2
Cocoa Hybrid 1
Vittal Cocoa Hybrid 2
Vittal Cocoa Hybrid 3
Cocoa Hybrid 4
Propagation
Cocoa can be propagated  by seeds. Seeds are to be extracted from pods. Cocoa pods take 150-170 days from pollination to attain  the harvest stage. The stage of maturity is visible from the change of pod  colour from green to yellow (Forestero) and red to yellow (Criollo). Collection  of seeds from biclonal or polyclonal seed gardens involving superior  self-incompatible parents is recommended to ensure genetic superiority of  planting materials.  In TNAU coconut  nursery, a poly clonal seed garden with 7 improved clones of KAU (CCRP1 to  CCRP7)  and Vittal cocoa clone 1 and 4 hybrids namely VTLCH1 to VTLCH4.
Criteria for selection of mother plants  for collection of seeds:
Forastero  type (green- immature, yellow- ripe) having medium to large pods of not less than 350 g weight,  smooth or shallow furrows on the surface without prominent constriction at the neck can be selected.
Husk thickness of pods should be less  than 1 cm.
Pod value (number of pods to give 1 kg  wet beans) should be less than 12.
Number of beans per pod has to be more  than 35.
Bean dry weight to be more than 1 g.
The best seeds for sowing are those from the  middle of the pod.
Harvesting
Extract middle beans
Harvested seed pods can be stored in shade upto one week. Viviparous  germination is reported in ripe cocoa which may affect the percentage of  germination if it is stored beyond one week. Seeds are to be sown  immediately after extraction from the pods. Viability of the beans can be  extended for some more days if freshly extracted seeds are stored in moist  charcoal and packed in polybags. Other alternative is extracting beans,  removing the testa and packing in polythene bags.
Potting  media
Red Soil + Sand + FYM @  2:1:1 + Super phosphate (5  kg/ton) was found to be best media for growth and development of cocoa  seedlings
Vegetative  propagation
As the seedling progenies showed wider  genetic variability, to maintain true to types, asexual or vegetative  propagation is followed. Grafting and budding are being followed in  multiplication of cocoa.  It also ensures  multiplication of identified high yielding clones in large quantities. Though  vegetative propagation of cocoa by budding, rooting of cutting and grafting are  feasible, the widely accepted methods in India are budding and grafting.
Vegetative    propagation
Rootstock
Scions
Success    (%)
Budding:
Patch budding
10-12 month old seedlings
Bud patch of 2.5 cm length and 0.5 cm width    from the bud wood
85
Grafting:
Soft wood grafting
3-4 month old seedlings
Scion stick of 12- 15 cm length with 2- 3    buds
70
Selection  of planting materials
When  seedlings are used as planting, select vigorous and healthy seedlings from  polyclonal garden. The planting material should be of 4-6 month old seedling or  grafted or budded plant.  The  seedling/grafted/budded plant should be planted in the centre of the pit, not  too deep. While planting grafts, polythene strip tied over graft joint should  be removed and the joint should be above the soil.
Seedlings
Budded  plants
Grafted  plants
Time  and method of planting
Cocoa is a shade loving  plant. During its seedling period it requires about 50% shade and later the  shade requirement is about 40%. The plant is grown as a mixed crop with other  plants like spices and rubber mainly under rainfed conditions. Cocoa is planted  as an intercrop in coconut and arecanut gardens.
Main crop
Spacing
(m)
Cocoa as inter crop
Coconut
7.5 x 7.5
One    Cocoa row of plants at 3m interval at the center of two Coconut rows and One    Cocoa at the center of two Coconut plants along the Coconut row. This layout    will hold about 500 plants per hectare
Arecanut
2.7 x 2.7
One Cocoa row of    plants at 2.7m interval at the center of two Arecanut rows. Likewise    alternate gaps of Arecanut rows should be filled in. This layout will hold    about 686 plants/ha.
Oil palm
4.5 x 4.5
Five cocoa plants    would come between four oil plants resulting in 400 plants per hectare.
Cocoa  under Arecanut
Cocoa under Oil palm
Cocoa  under coconut
Pits  of 50 cm x 50 cm x 50 cm are dug, allowed to weather for one month and refilled  with topsoil and 15-20 kg of compost of FYM to ground level. Tear off the  polybags carefully, place the soil ball with the seedlings in the planting hole  with minimum disturbance and press the soil around firmly. Planting should  coincide with the onset of monsoon, but in places where irrigation is resorted  to, flexibility in the time of planting is possible.
Planting of cocoa seedlings
Irrigation in  cocoa
Cocoa is usually grown in areas where water availability is  adequate. Cocoa plants are sensitive to drought, irrigation in such cases  becomes essential. During summer, as it exists in Southern India, the crop  requires irrigation at weekly intervals. When it is grown as mixed crop with  arecanut, the crop is to be irrigated once in a week during November-December,  once in 6 days during January-March and once in 4-5 days during April-May with  175 litres of water.
Age of the plant
Water    requirement
(litre/ plant    / day)
1st    year
3-5
2nd  year
10
3rd    year and later
20-25
Soil  nutrient management
Soil nutrient  management is critical to the general health of the tree, particularly where  cocoa is grown on poor soils with low nutrient levels. The fertility of soils  under cocoa plantations with complete canopy formation can be maintained or  sustained for a fairly long time due to the ability of cocoa fallen leaves to  recycle nutrients back into the soil and decomposition of leaf litter.  However, continuous harvesting will  eventually result in loss of soil nutrients
Fertilizer  schedule for cocoa
An annual application of the following  schedule should be applied in two equal splits, the first dose in April- May and the second dose in September- October i.e. pre and post  monsoon applications.
Fertilizer (g/ plant)
I year
II year
III year onwards
Urea
72
144
220
Rock phosphate
65
130
200
Muriate of Potash
77
154
230
Method  of application
Fertilizer may be applied uniformly around  the base of the tree up to a radius of 30 cm during the first year, forked and incorporated into the soil. For grown up  plants the best method is to rake and mix  the fertilizers with soil in shallow basins of around 75 cm. This radius may be  increased gradually upto 150 cm  after third year. Care should be taken not to spill the inorganic fertilizers  on the trunk, branches or leaves of young trees in order to avoid burning.
Fertilizer  application
Drip (Fertigation)
Fertilizers can be applied through drip irrigation system (fertigation). Weighed quantity of  fertilizers as per schedule was dissolved in water and then injected to  sub-main through venturi and then to lateral lines as per treatment. Drip  irrigation is done once in 2 days. The fertilizers are applied through drip  irrigation at weekly intervals. 100:40:140 kg of N, P and K are applied through  drip and fertigation in different stages of crop growth as detailed below.
Phases of crop
Months
Weeks
No. of weeks
*Water soluble fertilizers
(NPK (%))
1st    season flower initiation
January    & February
1-8
8
12.5
Fruit    set
March
9-13
5
10.0
Fruit    development
April    and May
14-22
9
12.5
Fruit    maturity, harvest and 2nd season flower initiation
June    and July
23-30
8
20.0
Fruit    set
August
31-35
5
12.5
Fruit    development
September    & October
36-43
8
15.0
Fruit    maturity and harvest
November    & December
44-52
9
17.5
Total
100
*Water soluble  fertilizers      :
All 19(19% N: 19 % P: 19 % K), Mono –  Ammonium Phosphate (MAP – 12:61:00 % NPK), Proprietary water Soluble form of N  and K fertilizers containing 13% N and 45 % K (Multi ‘K’) and Urea (46% N)
Venturi
Control valve
Control  knob
Drip
100 % RDF as WSF through fertigation by drip irrigation recorded  more pod weight (486.82 g), number of pods tree-1­  (56.87), Pulp + bean weight pod-1 (148.79 g), number of beans per  pod (48.62), single bean fresh weight (3.10g), single bean dry weight (1.24 g)  and dry weight of the beans per tree (3.429 g).
Nutrient  management in cocoa
Sixteen plant nutrients  are essential for proper crop development. Each is equally important to the  plant, yet each is required in vastly different amounts. These differences have  led to the grouping of these essential elements into three categories; primary  (macro) nutrients, secondary nutrients, and micronutrients.
Primary  (macro) nutrients
Primary (macro)  nutrients are nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. They are the most frequently  required in a crop fertilization program. Also, they are need in the greatest  total quantity by plants as fertilizer.
Secondary  Nutrients
The secondary nutrients are calcium,  magnesium, and sulphur. For most crops, these three are needed in lesser  amounts that the primary nutrients. They are growing in importance in crop  fertilization programs due to more stringent clean air standards and efforts to  improve the environment.
Micronutrients
The micronutrients are  boron, chlorine, cooper, iron, manganese, molybdenum, and zinc. These plant  food elements are used in very small amounts, but they are just as important to  plant development and profitable crop production as the major nutrients.  Especially, they work "behind the scene" as activators of many plant  functions like chlorophyll production, carbohydrate formation, cell division  and starch formation
etc.,
Micronutrient  deficiency
Zinc Deficiency
Symptoms are chlorosis of the leaves. This  appears   in patches and in advanced  stages the green areas are found only along the vein margins, giving a vein  banding   appearance to the leaves.  Affected leaves show mottling and crinkling with wavy margin. Most of the  younger leaves become narrow and sickle shaped showing characteristic ‘little  leaf’ symptom.
Symptoms on twigs include rosette and  dieback. Shortening of internodes causes a rosette type of growth.
Management:
Foliar spray of a mixture of 0.3%  (3gm  in 10 litter of water) Zinc Sulphate and 0.15% (w/v) lime.
Training  and pruning
Pruning and shade  management are essential in cocoa. Pruning involves thinning of branches and  removal of  old or  dead stems, whilst shade management involves  leaving forest trees and/or planting shade trees to optimise the light intensity  in the cocoa grove.
Pruning serves many purposes,  including:
It determines the shape of the tree.  It is important that the tree is shaped to  facilitate  local
Management  practices:
It maximizes the nutrient distribution  towards pods. By cutting away new and unproductive chupons on mature trees, the  pod size will be increased.
Thinning the cocoa canopy causes more light to  filter to the centre of the tree, and more air circulation, whereby Black Pod  disease can be reduced.
Pruning and height control
The basic aim of pruning cocoa trees is to encourage  a tree structure that allows sunlight   to  filter  through   to  the  main   branches  and  trunk   (what  is  known   as  a jorquette)  to   stimulate  flowering  and   facilitate  harvesting. Pruning generally takes place twice a year. The first pruning is  done after the main harvest (from April to July) and just before the rainy  season, and the second pruning five months later, during the months of November  and December.
Young  plants   should develop  a  jorquette   at  a  height   of    about  1   meter.    It has been found that  increasing light in-tensity decreases the jorquette-height. If a jorquette is  considered too low, it can be cut off. The strongest of the re-growing chupon  can be selected and all others removed.   In  due  course,   this  chupon  will   produce  a  jorquette   at  a  higher   level. Vegetatively propagated plants generally form a jorquette at  ground level.
Fan     branches   should  be  limited   to  3  to   4  to  allow   more  light  to   enter  and  decrease the   humidity  within  the   canopy.  Basal  chupons   should  be  removed   at  regular  intervals   and  all  lower   branches  that  form   or  bend  below   the  jorquette  should   be trimmed off. Furthermore   all  branches  within   60  cm  of   the  jorquette,  all   old  and  diseased branches  and   branches  growing  into   the  centre  of   the  tree  canopy   should  be  removed.   This should be  done  at   regular  intervals  through   maintenance  pruning.
All prunings should be left in the field to rot  down, except the diseased ones. Diseased or unwanted branches with vascular  die- back and water shoots are to be removed to maintain the health and vigour  of the tees. It include removing all unnecessary chupons, dead branches,  climbing plants, rodents- damaged and over ripe pods. Pruning the trees at 20 %   canopy removal will increase the number of flower  cushions per tree and number of fruits per tree and it reduces the light  transmission (12.72 %) and increases the   chlorophyll content (1.961 mg g-1)
Pruning  the cocoa tree
Pruned  tree
Pruning of grafted plants
Pruning of grafted plants is done, after  first year of planting, primary pruning should be done to obtain a supporting  framework of one or more upward growing main stems. Then drooping or inward  growing branches are to be removed. Secondary pruning is suggested to develop  well- shaped canopy and desired canopy should be maintained in umbrella shaped  form with about 3.8 m to 4.2 m spread and 2.7 m height depending upon the space  and main crop in which cocoa is under planted/grown. Pruning is usually done  annually in August- September. The proper pruning of   cocoa    ensures   adequate   ventilation    in   garden;   maintain    tree   height,   makes    spraying   and harvesting  operations easier. It also prevents damage during the harvesting operation for  the companion crop.
To prevent the entry of fungi, fungicides are  to be applied (Bordeaux paste) immediately after the pruning. Generally pruning  is done after harvesting.
Plant  protection in cocoa
Pests  and diseases are important risk to productivity and quality of harvest which in  turn affects the returns to the farmers. Since cocoa is an introduced crop the  more important for the farmer is to be clear about the pests and diseases and  be able to identify the symptoms correctly.
Pest management
1.  Mealy bugs
(
Planococcus  lilacinus, Planococcus citri,
Paracoccus marginatus
and
Rastrococcus iceryoides
)
It  colonizes on the tender parts of the plant such as growing tips of the shoots,  the terminal buds, the flower cushions, the young cherelles and mature pods.  Feeding of mealy bugs induces cherelle wilt. Following control measures are  recommended.
Planococcus lilacinus
Paracoccus marginatus
Rastrococcus  iceryoides
When the infestation is lesser
:  Spraying of Neem Oil 3% or fish oil rosin soap 25g/litre
In case of severe incidence
,  spraying of any one of the following chemicals is recommended  : Dimethoate (2 ml/litre) , Profenophos (2  ml/litre), Chlorpyriphos (5 ml/litre), Buprofezin (2 ml/litre), Imidacloprid  (0.6 ml/lit), Thiamethoxam (0.6g/litre)
In the area where
P. marginatus
alone occurs, field release of
Acerophagus papayae
, the  encyrtid parasitoid @ 100 per hamlet is recommended as the best management  strategy.
Acerophagus  papayae
2. Tea mosquitoe bugs
(
Helopeltis antonii
)
Infested  pods develop circular water soaked spots around the feeding punctures. These  punctures subsequently turn pitch black in color. Deformation of pods occurs  because of multiple feeding injuries.
Tea mosquitoe bug
Damage symptom
Management
When the infestation is lesser: Spraying  of Neem Oil 3% is recommended.
In case of severe incidence, spraying of  any one of the following chemicals is recommended: Imidacloprid (0.6 ml/lit) ,  Thiamethoxam (0.6g/litre), Profenophos (2 ml/litre), Carbaryl (2g/lit)
3.  Flatid Plant hoppers
Nymphs  and adults suck the sap from flowers, tender shoots and pods. They excrete  honey dew resulting in the development of sooty mould fungus on the leaves and  pods.
Flatid Plant hopper nymphs
Flatid Plant hopper Adults
Management:
Foliar application of a  newer molecule Thiacloprid @ 2 ml/litre twice at 5 days interval is recommended  for the management of these flatid plant hoppers.
4.  Aphids
(
Toxoptera  aurantii
and
Aphis  gossypii
)
They  colonize on the underside of tender leaves, succulent stem, flower buds and  small cherelles.  Heavy infestation may  occur during hot summer and after rainy season which brings about premature  shedding of flowers and curling of leaves.
Toxoptera aurantii
Aphis  gossypii
Management :
Spraying of dimethoate @ 2  ml per litre
5.
Hairy caterpillars
(
Lymantriya
sp
.,
Euproctis
sp
.,
Dasychira
sp.
,)
They  cause serious leaf damage on seedlings and young trees.
Defoliation
Management:
Foliar  spray of acephate @ 2g/litre of water
6. Stem  Girdler,
Sthenias grisator
Damage was done by  female beetle which girdles the branches and inserts whitish spindle shaped  eggs singly into the tissue in a slanting manner. Due to mechanical injury  caused by girdling and oviposition, the branches above the girdle wither and  dry.
Damage  by stem girdler
Adult  stem girdler
Management
Swab Coal tar + Kerosene @ 1:2 or  carbaryl 50 WP 20 g / litre (basal portion of the trunk - 3 feet height) after  scraping the loose bark to prevent oviposition by adults.
Hook out the grub from the bore hole and  apply monocrotophos 36 WSC 5 to 10 ml/ bore hole (or) one celphos tablet (3 g  aluminum phosphide)/bore hole (or) apply carbofuran 3G 5 g/bore hole and plug  with mud.
Injection of dichlorvas (DDVP) +  monocrotophos solution into bore holes after removing the webs and subsequently  sealing of the holes with clay gives satisfactory control of the pest.
7. Non- Insect pests
Rats (
Rattus rattus
) and squirrels (
Funambulus  trisriatus
and
F. palmarum
) are the major rodent pests  of cocoa.  They cause serious damage to  the pods. The rats usually gnaw the pods near the stalk portion whereas  squirrels gnaw the pods in the center
Rat damage
Squirrel damage
Management
The rats can be controlled by placing 10  g bromadiolone (0.005%) wax cakes or ripe banana stuffed with carbofuran on the  branches of cocoa trees twice at an interval of 10-12 days.
Squirrels are best controlled by  trapping with wooden or wire mesh single catch ‘live’ trap with ripe coconut  kernel as the bait.
Diseases
1.  Seedling blight
(
Phytophthora
palmivora
)
The symptom develop on the  leaves and stem of seedlings or budded plants. On leaves, small water soaked  lesions appear which later coalesce in the blighting of leaves. On stem, water  soaked lesions develop initially and later turn to black colour. Stem infection  develop any point on the stem causing the death of seedlings.
Management: Remove and destroy the affected  seedlings. Spray with 1 percent Bordeaux mixture or 0.2% copper oxychloride  just before the onset of monsoon and thereafter at frequent intervals.
2.  Black Pod rot
(
Phytophthora
palmivora
)
Infection appears as  chocolate brown spot, which spreads rapidly and soon occupies the entire  surface of the pod. As the disease advances, a whitish growth of fungus  consisting of fungal sporangia is produced over the affected pod surface.  Ultimately, the affected pods turn brown to black. The internal tissues as well  as the beans become discolored as a result of infection. The beans in the  infected pods approaching ripeness may escape infection because they are  separated from the husk on ripening
Black Pod rot
Management: Periodically remove the infected  pods.  Spray 1 per cent Bordeaux mixture  with on set of monsoon and also frequent intervals. Provide frequent drainage  and regulate shade to increases aeration.
Pseudomonas  fluorescens
(Pf1) liquid  formulations @ 0.5% as soil and foliar spray (3 times per year- June, October  & February) was found to be effective in reducing the Cocoa Pod rot and  Stem canker.
Preparation  of 1% Bordeaux mixture
The
mixture of copper sulphate and lime was known as Bordeaux mixture
Procedure:
Dissolve one kilogram of copper sulphate       in fifty litters of water in a plastic bucket
Dissolve       one kilogram of lime in fifty litters of water separately in a plastic       bucket
Pour  copper sulphate solution into the lime water slowly with constant stirring  using a wooden stick
Test  the mixture before use for the presence of free copper, which is harmful to the  plant by dipping a polished knife in it.
If the blade shows a reddish colour, add more  lime till the blade is not stained when dipped afresh in the mixture.
Always use wooden or earthen or copper vessels  for the preparation of Bordeaux mixture.
Bordeaux mixture
Bordeaux  paste
Bordeaux paste consists of same constituents  as that of Bordeaux mixture, but it is in the form of a paste as the quantity  of water used is too little. It is prepared by mixing 1 kg of copper sulphate  and 1 kg of lime in 10 liters of water. The method of mixing solution is  similar to that of Bordeaux mixture.
3.  Stem Canker
(
Phytophthora
palmivora
)
The cankers appear either  on the main trunk, jorquettes or fan branches. The earliest symptom is the  appearance of a greyish brown water soaked lesion on the outer bark. A reddish  brown liquid oozes out from these lesions, which later dries up to form rusty  deposits. The tissues beneath the outer lesion show reddish brown discoloration  due to rotting.
Management:
It can be  controlled in the initial stages by the excision of diseased bark followed by  wound dressing with Bordeaux mixture or copper oxychloride paste .Wilted  branches should be cut and removed.
4.  Vascular Streak Dieback (VSD)
It is reported from some parts of Kerala. The  first indication of the disease is a characteristic yellowing of one or two  leaves on the second or third flush behind the growing tip. Diseased leaves  fall within a few days of turning yellow and the other leaves on the shoot show  similar symptoms. When the infected shoot is split lengthwise there is always a  characteristic brown streaking.
Management:  The disease can be controlled by disposing diseased branches and regular  pruning of chupons on the trunk. Cocoa nurseries should not be located near the  diseased area. Avoid getting seedlings from diseased tracts. Kerala Agriculture  University has developed some VSD resistant and high yielding varieties CCRP-1  to CCRP-7.
5.Cherelle  wilt
The  shriveling and mummifying of some young fruits are a familiar sight in all  cocoa gardens. In the early stages the fruits lose their lustre and in four to  seven days they shrivel. The fruits may wilt but do not abscise. Many other  factors like insects, diseases, nutrient competition and over production may  also be associated with this problem. Hence, remedial measures will depend upon  the nature of the causative factors involved.
Cherelle  wilt
Harvesting  and Processing
Cocoa  produces flowers from the 3rd year of planting onwards and economic  yield starts from 5 th year. Properly well maintained (irrigation/  nutrient management) tree yielded 1-2 kg of pods / tree/ year.  Pods take about 140 – 160 days to ripen.  Generally, cocoa gives two main crops in a year,
i.e.
September – January and June to August. Offseason crops may be  seen throughout the year especially under irrigated condition. The stage of  maturity of the pod is best judged by change of color of pods. Pods that are  green when immature turn yellow when mature and reddish pods turn yellow or  orange. The change in color starts from the grooves on the pods and then  spreads to the entire surface. . The harvesting is to be done at regular  intervals of 10 -15 days. Avoid over ripening of pods.
Yield:
50-70  pods/tree/year
The  pods are heaped together and kept under shade for 5-6 days to ensure uniform  ripening. This reduces acidity and helps in development of a better flavor  suited for chocolate making. Cocoa pods are collected at a central location,  where pods are broken, husks removed and the white-yellowish seed masses are  heaped together for fermentation. Fermentation takes about 5 to 7 days,  depending on the season and temperature. Farmers sometimes mix the heap on the  2nd or 3rd day, to allow for aeration and a more uniform fermentation
For breaking the pods,  wooden billets may be used. After breaking the pods crosswise, the placenta  should be removed together with husk and the beans are collected for  fermentation.  On an average 10-12 pods  give 1 kg wet beans and 3 kg of wet beans (from 30-36 pods) give 1 kg of  fermented and dried beans. Under normal cultivation practices, each cocoa tree  yields about 1-2 kg annually.
Fermentation
Fermentation of cocoa  beans is essential to remove the edhering mucilaginous pulp to develop flavour  and aroma precursors, reduce bitterness and kill the germ of the seed and to  loosen the testa.  The process is simple  but must be carried out  properly in  order to get beans for good quality. Different methods of fermentation normally  followed are 1. Box 2. Basket. However, in this box and basket methods are  recommended depending on quality of bean to be fermented.
Box  method
The boxes of 60 cm X 60  cm X 45 cm made of wood and having reapers at the bottom to allow the sweating  from the pulp to drain out and provide aeration are used. The boxes could be  arranged in tiers for transferring beans from one to the next in line below.  Two detachable wooden planks are provided on one side of the box for  transferring (mixing) the beans by removing the planks.
The beans are loaded on  fermentation box and covered with banana leaves or gunny bags. The mixing of  beans is effected while transferring to the next box after 24 hours. The  temperature of the fermentation mass will rise to 45 – 550C after  about 48 hours of fermentation.
Every alternate day the beans under  fermentation have to be properly mixed for uniform fermentation. This has to be  continued for 6 days.
Basket  methods
In this method, Bamboo  or cane baskets of suitable size could be used for fermenting small quantity of  beans. One or two layers of banana leaves are placed at the bottom with  provision to drain the sweating. The basket is filled with the beans and the  surface is covered with banana leaves. A small weight is placed over the banana  leaves. The basket is placed over a raised surface to facilitate drainage of  the sweating for one day. Later the basket is covered with thick gunny bags.  The beans are mixed thoroughly on the 3rd and 5th days  and again covered with gunny bags. The fermentation will be completed at the  end of 6th day and the beans withdrawn for drying.
End  point of fermentation
Well fermented
beans will be plumpy and filled with  reddish brown exudates. The testa becomes loosened from the cotyledons. When  cut open, the cotyledons will have a brownish colored with lots of ridges and  furrow appearance in the centre with a brownish ring in the periphery. When  above 50 per cent beans in a lot show the above signs, it can be considered as  properly fermented.
Drying
During fermentation the  cocoa flavour develops and the beans turn brown. After fermentation, the beans  can be dried by sun drying. The fermented cocoa beans have considerable  moisture (55 -69 %) and the drying rate is depend upon temperature and the airflow.  Sun drying should be adopted as far as possible, as it gives superior quality  produce  compared to that by artificial  drying. The moisture content of well dried beans is around 6 – 7 %. Slow drying  is preferable for better quality of the beans.
Grading  and storage
The flat, slate,  shrivelled, broken and other extraneous materials are removed. The cleaned  beans are packed in fresh polythene lined (150 – 200 gauge) gunny bags. The  bags are kept on raised platform of wooden planks. The beans should not be  stored in room where spices, pesticides and fertilizers are stored as they may  absorb the odour from these materials.
Bean quality
Cocoa quality depends on various factors, but  primarily on the  cocoa variety and the  post-harvest handling. Generally, fine or flavour cocoa beans are produced from  Criollo or  Trinitario varieties, while  bulk cocoa beans come from Forastero trees.
Before fermentation
Fermented beans
Poor post-harvest  handling can cause cocoa beans to be mouldy and/or germinated which reduces or  diminishes the cocoa quality. Mouldy cocoa beans should be rejected on two  counts, namely the tainting and   off-flavours  to the beans and  possible contamination by mycotoxins (including ochratoxin).
Source:
https://cpcri.icar.gov.in
https://www.kau.in
Home
|
Nursery Techniques
|
Deficiencies & Disorders
|
Fertilizer Schedule
|
Plant Protection
|
Gallery
|
Contact
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU 2008 - 2024.