Agriculture :: Mineral Nutrition :: Introduction
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
Plant Nutrition :: Mineral Nutrition
FAQs
1. What       is the reason for the marginal leaf drying in rice?
Due to the deficiency of potassium  nutrient, the entire leaf margin is drying
2. Why       the rice leaf color turns to yellowing?
If  yellowing is occurring in old leaves, it is due to nitrogen deficiency. If it  is young leaves, that may be due to iron deficiency
3. Give       the symptoms of nitrogen deficiency in crops?
Chlorosis        (yellowing of leaves)
Stunted        growth/ poor plant growth
Poor        tillering / branching
4. How to       identify phosphorus deficiency?
Poor        root growth
Pinkish        pigmentation occurs on old leaves as well as the base of the shoot
Stunted        growth
5. What       is mean by ‘Tea Yellowing’?
Yellowing  of leaves in Tea is due to sulfur deficiency.
6. Give the typical  examples of iron Chlorosis present in plants
sugarcane
sorghum
7. What       is mean by ‘khaira’?
It is  the deficiency symptoms of zinc which occurs in rice plant.
8. Which nutrient  deficiency causes cooking of leaves?
Calcium
9. Fruit cracking appears  due to what nutrient deficiency?
Boron
10. “Phagala Blight of  sugarcane” caused by which Nutrient?
Manganese  deficiency
11. How to control iron  chlorosis in crops?
Foliar  spraying of 250-500g of ferrous sulphate dissolved in 100 lit of water.
12. Give the common  symptoms of boron deficiency in crops
dearth  of apical meristem followed b sprouting of lateral buds
Leaves  / petioles/stems may be thickened, wrinkled, curled and chlorotic.
The  fleshy pent may show brown flecks, necrosis, cracks or dry not
Reduced  flower and fruit set
13. Which nutrient is  essential for translocation sugar in plant system?
Boron
14. Rough skin of guava  and citrus is caused by which nutrient?
Boron  deficiency
15. Name the deficiency  symptoms of boron in grapes?
‘Hen and  chicken’ berries
16. How to control the  boron deficiencies in citrus, guava and grapes?
Citrus:  Foliar spray of 0.3% Boric acid (3g in 1 lit)
Guava:  Foliar spray of 1% Borax (10 g in 1 lit)
Grapes:  Foliar spray of 1% Borax (10 g in 1 lit)
17. How to control zinc  deficiency in banana and mango?
Banana :  Foliar spraying of 0.5% zinc sulphate (5g in 1 lit) or apply 30 g
zinc  sulphate per plant
18. Which nutrient causes  button shedding in coconut?
Boron
19. ‘Whip tail’ in  cauliflower is occurring by which nutrient?
Molybdenum  deficiency
20. How to control  ‘rosette’ appearance in citrus?
Foliar  application of copper sulphate @ 5-10 g in 10 lit of water
21. How to correct the  zinc deficiency in onion?
Seed  treatment with 0.01% zinc sulphate (1g zinc sulphate dissolved in 10 lit of  water) or Foliar application of 0.1% zinc sulphate (1g zinc sulphate in 1 lit  of water)
22. Give the remedial  measures of boron deficiency in cabbage, cauliflower, tomato and chilies.
Nursery  area: 40 g Borax per cent
Main  field: Borax @ 0.6 kg to 1.2 kg per ha
23. Which nutrient  deficiency produces “little leaf” in plant species?
Zinc  deficiency
24. What are the physiological disorders occur in Mango?
Spongy tissue
Mango malformation
Biennial bearing
Fruit crop
25. Why spongy tissues occur in Mango?
The activity of ripening enzymes due to high  temperature and post harvest exposure to sunlight
26. What are the symptoms of Mango malformation?
Compact mass of male flowers, greenish in color  and stunted growth
Thickening and shortening of main and secondary  rachis
Relatively longer bracts, sepals and petals as  compound to normal flowers
27. What are all the factors which cause mango fruit       drop?
Embryo abortion
Climatic factors
Disturbed water relation
Lack of “nutrition’
pest and disease attack
28. Name the serious physiological disorder in mango?
Black tip in a serious disorder, particularly in the  cultivar Dahemi.
29. Mention the symptoms of mango  black tip?
The damage to the fruits gets initiated right at marble  stage and finally black. At this stage/ further growth and development of the  fruit is retarded and black ring at the tip extends towards the upper part of  the fruit.
30. How to control the mango physiological disorders?
Spongy tissue
Mulching
Post harvest exposure to low temperature b/w 10-15c for  10-18 hrs.
Malformation
Spraying of Plano  fix (200mglit ppm) during first week of October followed by
deblossming at  bud burst stage.
Biennial bearing
Deblossoming during ‘On’ year
Soil application of paclobutrazol @ 4g/tree in the  month of September
Fruit crops
Foliar application of alar 2 100 ppm (100 mg /lit) or  NAA 200 ppm (planofix 200mg /lit) at pea stage of fruit.
Black tip
Spraying of Borax @ 1% (10g ;ot) at or pea stage  followed by two more sprang at 15 days interval
caustic soda@ 0.8% (8g/lit) or washing soda @  0.5% (5g/lit)
Planting of mango on Chan in North-south  direction and 5-6 km away from the brick kiln
31. What is mean by blossom end rot?
It  is the physiological orders which occurs in tomato due to calcium deficiency
Remedies
Maintain uniform soil moisture during dry  weather through mulching
Avoid over fertilizing with nitrogen
Foliar application of calcium sulphate @ 1% (10  g/lit)
32. List out the physiological disorders present in  grapes and give the connection measures.
Berry  shrivel
Shattering
Water berry
Berry shrivel
after inspiring begins, berries become flaccid  and sucker
Cause in unknown. But application of  gibberellin’s @ 16g/acre will reduce shrivel by 50 to 70% compare to the untreated.
Shattering
shatter refers to loose berries
Grinding at grunt set to increase berries weight  and incurrence the strength of being attachment to the capstem and may reduces  the shatter potential
Basing the clusters reduces the shatter during  packing
Water berry
There is no known control. However, it is  recommended to avoid over fertilization with nitrogen’
Foliar nutrient spray of nitrogen should be  avoided in water berry-pore vineyard.
Ammonium (or) Urea fertilizers should not be  applied via drip irrigation near the beginning (or) during fruit ripening
33. Give the       symptoms about bitter bit of apple.
Small brown lessons develop in the flesh of the fruit
Tissue below the skin becomes dark
Water  soaked spots on the skin rear the calyx. These spots turn darker and become  more sunken than the surrounding skin and are filling developed after one to  two month in storage.
Correction measure
Calcium chloride and calcium nitrate spray during  summer
Post harvest dipping
Drenching with calcium chloride (2-3%)
34. How to control internal browning (or) brown heart in       apple?
Avoid harvesting of ova nature fruit
Maintain Co2 concentration below 1% in controlled  atmosphere storage and win storey.
Proper temperature management and good ventilation
Avoid heavy wax coating and thoroughly and rapidly cool  fruit after waxing and packaging.
35. Mention the physiological disorders occur in pears
Core breakdown Watery Breakdown
Flesh spot Decay
Internal browsing
Senescent scald
36. List out the physiological disorders found in       tomatoes
Blossom drop
fruit cracks
Blossom end rot
Cat facing
Sunscald
Puffiness
37. Give the symptom of blossom end not
brown (or) black spot develops on the blossom end        of the fruit
Secondary organisms invade the affected tissue and        cause the fruit to rot.
38. What is the reason for fruit cracking  in tomato?
Heavy rain fall (or) irrigation followed by long        dry period
Fruit exposed to direct sun light
Also due to boron deficiency
Control measures:
Mulching during dry weather to maintain uniform        soil moisture
Growing resistant Varieties
Home
|
Seasons & Varieties
|
Tillage
|
Nutrient Management
|
Irrigation Management
|
Weed Management
|
Crop Protection
|
Cost of Cultivation
|
Photobank
|
Disclaimer
© All Rights Reserved. TNAU-2016.