Glossary :: C
Calf Crop
The  number or percentage of calves produced in a herd within a given year relative  to the number of cows and heifers exposed to breeding.
Canopy
The uppermost layer in a forest,  formed collectively by tree crowns.
Chisel
A  farm implement used to break through and shatter compacted or otherwise  impermeable layers of soil.
Contour Farming
Field  operations such as plowing, planting, cultivating, and harvesting on the  contour, or at right angles to the natural slope to reduce soil erosion,  protect soil fertility, and use water more efficiently.
Cultivar
The name officially given for all  cultivated varieties of plants.
Cultivator
A  machine used to till the upper portion of the soil, primarily used to destroy  weeds or form a moisture retaining mulch.
Calcification
Process including  accumulation of calcium carbonate.
Carrier:
The liquid or solid  material added to a chemical compound to facilitate its storage, shipment and  application.
Case  study
A  case study consists of materials related to an event, or problem. Since most of  the case studies are related to real life situation, the analysis of case  studies will help in acquiring
development of analytical skills.
Cash  crop
A high value marketable  crop, e.g., sugarcane, cotton, jute, tobacco, tea etc.
Catch  crop
A  quick growing crop incidentally planned and harvested between two major crops  in consecutive seasons, also it may be a contingency crop grown to replace a  major crop which has failed.
Catchment  area
Catchment  Area is the term used to describe the entire area under a watershed that drains  into a source. An area from where entire rainwater is collected and then  conducted to a reservoir.
Chemigation
The  process where fertilizers and pesticides are applied into irrigation water to  fertilizer crops and control pests.
Chiselling
Breaking of loosening  the soil, without inversion, with a chilse plow, usually below normal plow  depth.
Complex  fertilizers
The  commercial fertilizer containing atleast two or more of the primary essential  nutrients, they are designed as incomplete complex fertilizers, while those  containing all these primary nutrients are called
as complex fertilizers.
Crop  rotation (sequential cropping)
The growing of different  crops on a piece of land in a pre-planned succession.